---
title: "A History More Refined: Malay Women’s and Men’s Magazines of the 1950s
  in Singapore and Malaya"
permalink: /vol-4/issue4/jan-2009/history-malay-women-men-magazine/
description: This essay covers the historiography of Malay periodicals of the
  1950s. It elucidates the use of magazines as vital historical sources, and
  traces the history of magazines for women and men in Singapore.
image: /images/Vol 4 Issue 4/MalayWomen/modern dress1.jpg
---
####  This essay covers the historiography of Malay periodicals of the 1950s. It elucidates the use of magazines as vital historical sources, and traces the history of magazines for women and men in Singapore.

This article covers the historiography of Malay periodicals of the 1950s. It elucidates the use of magazines as vital historical sources and the history of magazines for women and men in Singapore and Malaya.

#### **Magazines as Historical Sources**

Within Malaysian historiography, much has been written about official documents as a result of its focus on colonial policy and practice. However, as the domains of historical inquiries expanded, scholars began to pay more attention to the local society especially the countries in Southeast Asia.

In the past, scholars would argue that indigenous materials are scarce and inaccurate. Official records, which consist of letters, reports, policy papers, whilst helpful also have certain limitations. They were not focused on the ruled but the ruler. With the increase in nationalistic sentiments and developments towards nation building in the 1950s, scholars began to contemplate more on the local history, which hitherto had been a neglected area of research.

Western scholars were also increasing calls for autonomous and indigenous studies of Asian history. This has implications on how history is being written and in the use of its sources. In the case of contemporary history of Singapore and Malaysia written and oral records can be used. Oral sources however, are problematic in terms of the availability of interviewees and the element of memory. Historians have reached a consensus that oral sources are best used in accompaniment with written sources. While colonial records represent a type of written source, publications such as newspapers, literary works, journals and magazines are gateways to the indigenous societies. Ironically, far more Malay newspapers have been produced in Malaya than English newspapers throughout the 20th century.1 

There are differences between using newspapers and periodicals in historical inquiry. Newspapers are indispensable as they provide a wide coverage of events and developments of a certain place and time. A periodical’s usefulness lies in its specificity. Periodicals are targeted at a certain audience with specific objectives, and therefore, contain thoughts of particular groups in a particular nation. Periodicals invite us to the *weltanshauung* (worldview) and *mentalite* (mentality) of groups in a community. The use of periodicals in historical enquiry is beginning to find its equitable place alongside newspapers. As Dr A.M Iskandar posits, there were more than 400 different periodicals published in Malaysia throughout the 20th century until 1968.2  This phenomenon is compelling given that only a small group of Malay-medium students had university education. In this light, Malay periodicals are under utilised as historical sources.

In the decolonisation of Malaya, the crucial process of identity formation within a multi-cultural society had to be accompanied by the self-empowered need to modernise itself along western lines. The tumultuous period of nation-building in the 1950s necessitated the creation of a progressive and open society to fulfill this vision of decolonisation by modernisation.3 It was a bulwark against the rise of Communism and Communalism in Asia, particularly Singapore and Malaya.4 Benedict Anderson concisely outlines this phenomenon as “the convergence of capitalism and print technology on the fatal diversity of human language \[which\] created the possibility of imagined community, which in its basic morphology set the stage of the modern nation”.5

The proliferation of Malay periodicals, specifically political magazines, men’s magazines, women’s magazines, children’s magazines and educational magazines was an answer to the call for nation-building. It was a manifestation of the search of the new Malayan identity that Malaya and Singapore had taken on its path to independence. T.N Harper’s *The End of Empire* and the *Making of Malaya* posits that the “capacity of the state to create identity is a central issue in modern Malaysian history”.6 He reveals that the search for the British vision of the “Malayan” in art and literature was somehow “defeated by an upsurge of explorations in ethnic and religious identity that emanated from networks within vibrant popular cultures in town”. This effectively means that the rise of consciousness in identities within Malayan communities had thwarted colonial attempts to create one. Magazines were manifestations of this search for the Malayan identity, the Malayan Malay identity.

How would the use of women’s and men’s magazines assist scholars in this respect? The identity formation of modern Malay women, shaped by women’s magazines, was part of the larger upsurge of the various explorations of ethnic and religious identities that successfully refrained state-led attempts to create a British Malayan one. At the level of racial politics, the formation of the “modern” was part of a greater desire to ensure that Malay women got ahead of women from other groups. Kristin Ross’s theory in the reverberating example of modernising French women in the 1950s, “let’s win over the women and the rest will follow… \[was\] to target the innermost structure of society”.7 Reinventing the home was reinventing the nation. Men’s magazines, on the other hand, promoted the impetus to modernise men along western lines while providing an out-of-bounds marker on what is permissible for their Malay/ Muslim identity.

#### **History of Men’s & Women’s Magazines in Singapore**

#### ***Brief History of Malay Print in Singapore***

During 1876-1941, Malay publishing went through three different phases of Malay journalism. According to William Roff (1972), the first phase of Malay journalism occurred in the period 1875–1905. Non-Malays such as Straits-born Muslims (Jawi Peranakans) and Straits-born Chinese (Baba Peranakans) dominated the phase.8 Ian Proudfoot (Working Paper 1994) outlines that it was the Javanese who dominated the scene, not the Jawi Peranakans.9 Despite this revelation, the weekly *Jawi Peranakan* was a manifestation of this era as the longest surviving periodical of its time (1876–1905).

The second phase (1906–1916) of Malay journalism, according to Roff, was characterised by a rise of major ‘national’ dailies as well as the appearance of religious journals. This was probably the first time that a pan-Islamic religious publication began to make its first presence. These journals were both reformist and influential and were unique to Singapore. Two publications were highlights of these genres. One was *Utusan Melayu*, first published in November 1907. It was the first ‘national’ ‘daily’ that was published thrice a week by Mohd. Eunos Abdullah. The other was the monthly Al-Imam (1906), the first Islamic reform journal to be published in Southeast Asia. It was the most influential journal of its time.

The third phase (1917–1941) saw a rise of new titles and new types of publications such as dailies and weeklies, religious periodicals, non-religious periodicals (association magazines, school magazines), literary periodicals, periodicals from “progress associations” such as clubs and societies and lastly, journals of entertainment. It is worth deliberating on the “journals of entertainment” to understand the beginnings of popular magazines such as men’s and women’s magazines. These journals, which started appearing in the late 1920s, gave birth to men’s and women’s magazines later in spite of the interruption from the Second World War.

Roff identifies such light-hearted tendencies in otherwise sober journals of entertainment. He sees them as an attempt to produce content of a more entertaining nature. Although these were light in intent, the periodicals were mostly didactic. Lightweight popular knowledge such as humorous sketches, jokes and “Pak Pandir tales” were incorporated into the content of the journal. Some journals, though unrepresentative of its time, were characterised as “unashamed entertainment”. Examples of these suggestive periodicals were Suleiman Ahmad’s infamous monthlies such as *Dunia Sekarang*, *Shorga Dunia*, *Melayu Muda* and others. Their salacity provoked the religious authorities, resulting in the banning of these publications. Magazines of this nature were more accepted during the post-war period. A more well-known and respectable of this light-hearted genre is *Al-Ikhwan* by renowned Sayyid Shakh al-Hadi.

Roff’s appraisal of the three different phases in Malay journalism from 1876–1941 is complemented by Hamedi Mohd Adnan’s elucidation of the period after. He categorises the ensuing period into two. These are the period of the Japanese Occupation of Singapore and Malaya (1941–1945), and the post-war period up to the time of Malaya independence in September 1957 (1945–1957). Hamedi explains the sociohistorical factors of the post-war period that made the birth of and reception to Malay periodicals a unique occurrence This period saw the wide circulation and publication of popular magazines in Malaya and Singapore.

This period saw the emergence of Singapore as a premium printing and publishing centre in the region. Singapore’s political, economic and cultural infrastructure was instrumental in the political, intellectual, cultural and economic revival of the industry. This was due to the existence of a significant professional printing and publishing class such as printers, publishers, writers, journalists and activists. In addition, the greater existence of capital and publishing/ printing technological know-how in Singapore promoted Singapore’s position as a cultural hub greatly.

According to Hamedi, from the date of the Japanese surrender (15 August 1945) until September 1957, 145 Malay magazine titles were published in Singapore and Malaya. During the same period, 46 newspaper titles were also published.10 These figures were an improvement over the figures provided by Iskandar in 1973, which were 105 magazine titles and 26 newspaper titles respectively.11

Hamedi proposes three main reasons for the increase in the number of Malay periodicals in this period. The most important factor, he believes, was the official declaration of the Emergency of Malay in 1948. The Emergency activated the mobilisation of Malay men into defence of the country. More and more Malay men entered the army and police and as a result, the demand for leisure reading was very high. The need for light reading also arose from the men and women who were weary from the Occupation and the postOccupation social turmoil in the community. This was also supported by a rise in rubber prices due to the eruption of the Korean War in 1949. The rubber boom was instrumental for the growth of the printing and publishing industry. Thirdly, he observes that there was a shift of focus and interest, from publishing the religious and the social to the entertaining and the popular, to meet the reading demands of the public.






