---
title: "Resonating with Youths in Singapore: Managing Cultural Identity in Web Design"
permalink: /vol-4/issue2/jul-2008/youth-cultural-identity-web-design/
description: "Media and entertainment websites were used as an empirical
  resource for the investigation and understanding of the definition of Chinese
  youths in Singapore. An understanding of “youth cultural identity” is
  fundamental in analysing their response to global cultural influences: it
  would resonate with their consumption of information from the web medium."
image: /images/Vol 4 Issue 2/f1_hyakuhana2.jpg
---
#### Media and entertainment websites were used as an empirical resource for the investigation and understanding of the definition of Chinese youths in Singapore. An understanding of “youth cultural identity” is fundamental in analysing their response to global cultural influences: it would resonate with their consumption of information from the web medium.

     Studies demonstrate that traditional mainstream<br>     media such as newspapers, television and radio<br>     play a key role in the management of cultural <br>     inter-ethnic relations in Singapore (Kuo, 1999).<br>     Design strategies for cultual web communications<br>     are a new way to express the formation and<br>     representation of new national and cultural<br>     identities in contemporary Chinese communities.<br>     Internet culture has influenced lifestyle and<br>     cultural identity of youths in the global economy.<br>     Recent surveys in Singapore have also shown that<br>     connectivity (via electronic means) is among their<br>     top Five'C's1 in the their social priorities (Yen, 2005).

In this study, media and entertainment websites are used as an empirical resource for the investigation and understanding of the definition of Chinese youths in Singapore. An understanding of ‘youth cultural identity’ is fundamental in analysing their response to global cultural influences: it would resonate with their consumption of information from the web medium. Media and entertainment websites are integral because this industry forms a key aspect of popular culture in Singapore. Moreover, there is an increasing trend to incorporate pop culture consumption in national policies. For instance, Chinese pop singers, pop idols and television celebrities have become media network spokespersons for the promotion of the official Chinese language in the state-initiated ‘Speak Mandarin’ Campaign.2 

This research contributes to the theoretical discussion on the notion of a potential ‘East Asian Identity’ among the Chinese youth group. ‘East Asian Identity’ is constructed on the basis of the criss-crossing consumption of popular cultural products (pop music, movies, fashion and food) across geographical boundaries in the region (Chua, 2004). The analysis is also examined with reference to the local cultural environment (Singapore) in the context of the growing economy in China.

Based on a cultural analytical model, this study will examine how cultural characteristics are manifested through various Singapore media and entertainment websites while focusing on key components of visual interface designs such as colour, metaphor and information architecture. These components shall be studied in relation to their socio-cultural environment. Visual languages will be chosen for the analysis as these design components have increasingly played a primary role for members of the younger generation especially in verbal expressions and its respective comparisons. As observed by Frutiger, the influx of pictorial information and moving visuals such as computer games, manga, Music Television Video (MTV) have encapsulated the ‘idea’ in visual form, directing the eye to the human mind. The ‘stylising’ of pictures and signs has become an alternative process of reading printed text (Frutiger, 1989). This analysis demonstrates that different design approaches implemented by the media and entertainment corporations yield different visual responses, leading to the varied manifestations of Singapore cultural identity, and its impact on the changing trends of regional and global development.

#### **Conceptualising Singapore Cultural Identity and the Internet: Singapore Chinese Youth**

The Internet provides a new channel in the formation of national and cultural identities for Chinese communities. In the midst of globalisation and with China now an economic superpower, the learning of the Chinese language in Singapore has been continuously reinforced in the recent years. This includes an increasing number of online virtual communities that aim to foster community building and Chinese language learning, in bilingual (Mandarin and English language) sites such as OMY3 (<a href="https://www.facebook.com/groups/6133538603/">https://www.facebook.com/groups/6133538603</a>) and STOMP (Straits Times Online Mobile Print - <a href="https://stomp.straitstimes.com/">https://stomp.straitstimes.com/</a>). Both of these news and interactive web portals provide young users with an interactive platform to share their views and opinions online and also through new media channels such as SMS, MMS, vodcast and podcast.

The OMY interactive portal is targeted at online users between the ages of 18 and 35, who are comfortable with speaking Mandarin but are not used to reading Chinese. The portal offers various functions such as ‘text to speech’ listening and display ‘Hanyu Pinyin’ pronunciation to help readers read Chinese words. These online interactions have successfully served as a potential space for state government to address economic agendas and shape national and cultural identities of the nation-state.

Since the rise of pop cultural products in the region during the 1980s, Chua observes the emergence of a potential ‘East Asian Identity’ among the younger generation. This East Asian pop culture presents the development, production, exchange and consumption of pop cultural products across China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore. Chua concludes that Singapore would remain a location of consumption of East Asian pop culture than a production and export oriented location due to its limited domestic market. Hence, driven as a capitalist activity, the consumption of these cultural products defines a large part of everyday life in contemporary Singapore. The new generation can easily embrace the trends of cultural products regionally and internationally. As these cultural products are transnational, the criss-crossing phenomenon draws a vague distinction between what is local and what is foreign among young, urban and middle class consumer lifestyles (Chua, 2004).

Popular imageries, that include Animamix art (Animation and comics) are manifested in both conventional and unconventional art forms such as comics, video games, manga, anime and graphic communication. Anime, originated from Japan through the roots of manga are produced, consumed and widely accepted by the younger generation. The aesthetic concept of Asian pop culture in visual art form from a group of contemporary western and eastern artists was presented at a contemporary art exhibition – Fiction@Love organised by the Singapore Art Museum in 2006. The aesthetic hallmarks of pop imageries, such as artworks by Ai Yamaguchi and Chiho Aoshima, are often presented with vivid visuals, bright colours, use of metaphors and humourous contents. Similar to Chua’s discourses of East Asian cultural products, Lu observed that the creation of Animamix Art is also a crossindustry integration due to the great amount of material and financial and human resources involved. This Neo-Aesthetics of Animamix Art created from the Asian perspective is going to shape the visual trend and emerge as a new identity of pop culture in Asia (Lu, 2006).

Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew commented that Singapore will not evolve into a homogeneous group but neither will it emerge with any distinctive identity as a result of modern technology and advancement. He pointed out that Chinese Singaporeans must adapt to changes in technology and a ‘digital’ lifestyle as well as accommodate to a multi-racial, multi-religious and multi-cultural society (Peh, 2006).

Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong further elaborated his new metaphor representing the two groups of Chinese Singaporeans – the Chinese educated (‘heartlanders’) individuals and the English educated bilingual (‘cosmopolitan’) individuals. The ‘heartlanders’ are characterised as the ‘culture carriers who play a major role in maintaining our core values and our social stability’. In comparison, the ‘cosmopolitans’ are the professionals who are ‘valued for their economic contributions and international outlook to operate and produce goods and services for the global market. Their loyalties are fluid and dictated by economic considerations’. It is also observed that the English educated Chinese (‘cosmopolitans’) are regarded as being the elites and the centre of power and influence with the Chinese educated (‘heartlanders’) at the periphery (Tan, 2002).

Living in a globalised and technological era, Singapore’s new cultural identity will continue to evolve more rapidly than before. While Singapore’s youths continue to accept foreign ideas, traditional values will constantly be revitalised. A hybrid pluralistic identity influenced by transnationalism and its complex socio-cultural network may be formed eventually with an essence of local peculiarities. This socio-economic development discursively intertwined with cultural and cognitive changes – such as values, beliefs, norms, attitudes and lifestyles as well as the dense flow of cultural products – are some determining factors in shaping one’s cultural identity on local youths.

#### **Approaches to Cultural Model**

In recent studies, ‘cultural modeling’ has become a popular analytical tool in implementing design and communication strategies for cross-cultural marketing. According to del Galdo and Nielson, cultural modeling helps to identify global information, cultural bias, and cultural metaphors and assess the degree of localisation. Every cultural model establishes its own agendas, and addresses the consumer or corporate needs (del Galdo &amp; Nielson, 1996). Similarly, the notion of a culturally centered design in web communication needs to illustrate a profound understanding of the socio/cultural environment of society.

#### **Fleming’s Design Process Model**

The proposed methodology for web analysis is derived from the cultural analytical model developed by E. M. Fleming (1982). Fleming’s cultural analysis seeks ‘to examine in depth the relation of artefacts to aspects of its own culture’. Fleming designed a five-fold classification system on the basic properties of an artefact, namely its history, material, construction, design and function and set of four operations, namely, identification, evaluation, cultural analysis and interpretation. In this context, identification refers to the distinctive facts about the artefact. Evaluation is a set of judgments about the artefact that is usually based on comparisons with other examples of its kind. Cultural analysis examines the various interrelationships of an artefact and its contemporary culture. Interpretation refers to the meaning and significance of the artefact in relation to its own culture (Fleming, 1982).

Fleming’s multiple layer system of segmenting the design process acts as a reflective mental guide between designer and user perception. It provides a wider set of considerations when analysing an artefact as evaluation is encouraged at every stage of the design process (with considerations on cultural relevancies, functionality and design).

Using this model of respect and understanding of the user’s culture, contemporary designers can implement better design solutions that not only improve usability, but also convey cultural identity and help connect the user emotionally. Although such emotionalised brand expressions are common practice in print media, the key component of effective design solutions – colour, metaphor and information architecture – are key criteria for creating strong visual and sensory identity in web communications. For instance, the multifaceted meaning of colour that displays cultural differences is subjected to regional context (Peterson, 2000). Visual metaphors ‘facilitate learning by allowing users to draw upon the knowledge they already possess about the reference system’ (Nielson, 2000). Information architecture is also argued as a ‘metaphor’ because it shows how items on the page are saliently presented in hierarchical association that draws users attention across the page. It presents a reading pattern or blue print to help users reach their goals on web interfaces (Veen, 2001).





