---
title: Artist Yip Yew Chong Paints His Story in History
permalink: /podcast/yip-yew-chong/
variant: tiptap
description: ""
third_nav_title: Episode 14
---
<p>Yip Yew Chong’s 60-m long work, “I Paint My Singapore”, has been drawing crowds since it went on display at the Raffles City Convention Centre (ends 1 January 2024). Comprising 27 scenes of 1970s–1980s Singapore, it merges history, memory and nostalgia. In this episode of BiblioAsia+, Yew Chong explains how these works were created and reveals what he would love to paint but cannot.</p><p></p><h4><strong>Listen to the Full Episode</strong></h4><p>Available on <a href="https://open.spotify.com/episode/6NYgoIymDy90Ng76tWsjsr" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Spotify</a>, <a href="https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/artist-yip-yew-chong-paints-his-story-in-history/id1688142751?i=1000639313389" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Apple Podcasts</a>, <a href="https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cHM6Ly9mZWVkcy5jYXB0aXZhdGUuZm0vYmlibGlvYXNpYS8/episode/ZDE1YTc1MmMtYmU1Ni00ODE4LTliYWQtYzY5NmRhNzY0ZDJm?sa=X&amp;ved=0CAUQkfYCahcKEwiI56C6nqCDAxUAAAAAHQAAAAAQNA" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Google Podcasts</a>, <a href="https://www.melisten.sg/podcast/playlist/BiblioAsia%2B-2115156" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">melisten</a>.</p><p><a href="https://open.spotify.com/show/66PYiIthr1KqQhJ82XH4DN" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Subscribe</a> to get notified when the next episode drops.</p><p></p><h4><strong>What Yew Chong Talked About</strong></h4><p>01:53 – What “I Paint my Singapore” is about<br>04:14 – What inspired Yew Chong to paint this 60 m canvas<br>08:31 – Yew Chong’s favourite scene in the painting, and his childhood in Kreta Ayer<br>14:32 – His research process for the painting<br>21:18 – Balancing historical research with creative licence<br>23:56 – What he finds hard to paint<br>24:49 – Painting alone in studio versus in public, and indoors versus outdoors<br>26:54 – Recent books about Yew Chong and his work: <em>The Art of Joy</em> and <em>I Paint my Singapore</em><br>31:12 – What he is working on now<br>34:11 – What he wants to paint but hasn’t<br>34:58 – How he overcomes artist’s block<br>35:24 – What he thinks about Banksy</p><p></p><h4><strong>About the Guest</strong></h4><p>Yip Yew Chong was an accountant till he became a full-time artist in 2018. His practice includes different visual mediums: murals, canvas, sketches, installations, videography and photography. His public murals may be seen in the streets of Singapore and other regional cities, including Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh and Phnom Phen while his canvases have been shown in art galleries.</p><p></p><h4><strong>Resources</strong></h4><p>Woon Tai Ho, <em>The Art of Joy: The Journey of Yip Yew Chong </em>(Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, 2023).</p><p>Yip Yew Chong, <em>I Paint My Singapore: Familiar Scenes of Home</em> (Singapore: Landmark Books, 2023).</p><p></p><h4><strong>Credits</strong></h4><p>This episode of BiblioAsia+ was hosted by Jimmy Yap. Sound engineering was done by One Dash. The background music "Di Tanjong Katong" was composed by Osman Ahmad and performed by <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uA2v7ka5TAI" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Chords Haven</a>. Special thanks to Yew Chong for coming on the show.</p><p>BiblioAsia+ is a podcast about Singapore history by the National Library of Singapore.</p>