---
title: Early Printing in the Philippines
date: 2021-06-01
permalink: /articles-archive/features/early-printing
layout: post
---
<style>
table { 
	background-color: #e5ebf6;
	}
.infobox { 
  padding: 20px;
  margin: 20px;
  background: #e5ebf6
}
</style>

#### Continuing with the series on printing in Southeast Asia, **Gracie Lee** explores the early history of printing and printed works in the Philippines.

<div style="background-color: white;">Map of the Philippine Islands  (1924) compiled and published by John Bach, and the cover to the postal directory accompanying the map. The map was lithographed by Carmelo and Bauermann. Gift of Mr Tan Yeok Seong. Collection of the National Library, Singapore (Accession no.: B19475837K).</div>

The spread of printing in Southeast Asia is closely intertwined with European colonisation and the arrival of missionaries in the region from the 16th century onwards. While the time-honoured art of woodblock printing (known also as xylography) had been used in Vietnam as early as the 11th century,[^1] book printing was unknown in the rest of Southeast Asia where oral and manuscript traditions had existed for centuries.[^2] The emergence of a print culture in the Philippines is particularly fascinating as it chronicles the transnational and cross-cultural transfer of printing knowledge among the Europeans, the Chinese and indigenous Filipinos within colonial Filipino society and economy.


<div style="background-color: white;">Doctrina Christiana, en Lengua Española y Tagala (1593), widely accepted as the oldest surviving book printed in the Philippines. The woodcut frontispiece of the Spanish-Tagalog version depicts Dominic de Guzmán, the founder of the Dominican Order. Library of Congress, Rare Book and Special Collections Division. Retrieved from Library of Congress website. </div>


<div style="background-color: white;">The Chinese version of the Doctrina Christiana titled《辯正教真傳實錄》(Testimony of the True Religion). Written by Dominican friar Juan Cobo and printed in 1593, one of the illustrations in the publication shows a Dominican friar with a book in his hand (presumably the Bible) conversing with a Chinese scholar. Image from the holdings of the Biblioteca Nacional de España. Retrieved from Biblioteca Digital Hispánica website.</div>

##### Beginnings of Printing in the Philippines
According to the earliest written accounts of the history of the country, pre-colonial Philippines was a literate society with an indigenous writing system. In Relación de las Islas Filipinas (1604), one of the earliest works about the Philippines and its people, Spanish Jesuit priest and historian Pedro Chirino wrote: “All these islanders are much given to reading and writing and there is hardly a man, and much less a woman, who does not read and write in the letters used in the island of Manila.”[^3] These writings were inscribed on perishable materials such as tree bark, leaves and bamboo tubes.[^4] 
Printing came on the heels of the spread of Christianity and Spanish colonisation during the 16th century. Although the beginnings of the first printing press in Philippines are obscure, most scholars agree that the Dominicans, a Roman Catholic order, were the first to start printing in the Philippines. Much of the early printed literature in the Philippines consisted of catechism and language instructional texts published by various Catholic religious orders operating in the Philippines such as the Franciscans, the Jesuits and the Augustinians.[^5] 

##### Oldest Known Book Printed in the Philippines
The Doctrina Christiana (Christian Doctrine) is widely accepted as the oldest surviving book printed in the Philippines. This publication of Catholic teachings was printed in 1593 using the xylographic method in two editions. The version in Spanish-Tagalog was written for the local Filipino population and is attributed to Franciscan friar Juan de Plasencia, whose translation was approved by the diocesan synod in 1582. The second was produced in Chinese for the conversion of the Chinese community in the Parián,[^6]  a commercial enclave of Manila. 
In a letter from the governor-general of the Philippines, Gómez Pérez Dasmariñas, to King Philip II of Spain dated 20 June 1593, Dasmariñas wrote that because of the existing great need, “he had granted a licence for the printing of the Doctrinas Christianas, herewith enclosed – one in the Tagalog language, which is the native and best of these islands, and the other in Chinese – from which I hope great benefits will result in the conversion and instruction of the peoples of both nations; and because the lands of the Indies are on a larger scale in everything and things more expensive, I have set the price of them at four reales a piece, until Your Majesty is pleased to decree in full what is to be done”.[^7]  
Printing permits were required as books were a tightly controlled commodity during Spanish rule (1565–1898) in the Philippines. In 1556, a royal cedula (decree) was issued prohibiting the sale of books about the East Indies without a special licence. 
In 1583, the Commissary of the Holy Office in Manila was instructed to inspect and seize imported books of prohibited titles. Restrictions were extended the following year such that “when any grammar or dictionary of the language of the Indies be made, it shall not be published or printed or used unless it has first been examined by the Bishop and seen by the Royal Audiencia [the colonial court]”.[^8]  
Up until the mid-20th century, there were two known versions of the Doctrina Christiana in existence – a Spanish-Tagalog edition held at the Library of Congress titled Doctrina Christiana, en Lengua Española y Tagala (Christian Doctrine in Spanish and Tagalog Languages) printed at the Dominican Church of San Gabriel in Manila, and an undated Chinese edition found in the Vatican Library titled Doctrina Christiana en Letra y Lengua China (Christian Doctrine in the Chinese Language and Letters) compiled by Dominican priests ministering among the Sangleys (people of mixed Chinese and Filipino ancestry) and printed by Keng Yong, a Chinese living in the Parián district of Manila. In the absence of other known copies, these two texts were thought to be the ones referred to in the governor-general’s letter.[^9] 
In 1952, however, the discovery of another Chinese version at the Biblioteca Nacional de España (National Library of Spain) rippled across the scholarly community. Titled《新刻僧師高母羡撰無極天主正教真傳實錄》(Xin Ke Seng Shi Gao Mu Xian Zhuan Wuji Tianzhu Zhengjiao Zhenchuan Shilu; A Printed Edition of the Veritable Record of the Authentic Tradition of the True Faith in the Infinite God, by the Religious Master Kao-mu Hsien), also known as《辯正教真傳實錄》(Bian Zhengjiao Zhenchuan Shilu, Testimony of the True Religion), the work was written by Dominican friar Juan Cobo, who arrived in Manila in 1588. It was printed in the “second month of the spring in the year of our Lord 1593”.[^10] 
This new find has now been generally accepted as the Chinese version mentioned in the governor-general’s letter. According to Cobo, the book was “published with licence of the Bishop and the Governor” and when they first arrived in Manila, they commissioned a skilled craftsman to carve the woodblocks that were used in the printing of the book. The content takes the form of a dialogue, and was likely inspired by the dialogic exchange featured in Jesuit Michele Ruggieri’s《天主實錄》(Tianzhu Shilu; The True Record of the Lord of Heaven), the first Chinese catechism text printed in 1584. 
Cobo’s work contains a mix of treatises on theology, Western cosmography and natural history accompanied by illustrations of the cosmos, planets and animals. 
In this respect, it also bears similarities with another earlier work. Penned in 1583 by another Dominican friar, Fray Luis de Granada, who was a noted theologian, writer and preacher, the Introducción del Símbolo de la Fe (Introduction of the Symbol of Faith) was an attempt to explain the Christian doctrine through natural theology – an argument that evidence of intelligent design in nature points to the existence of a creator God. This approach was probably designed to appeal to learned Chinese readers as shown in the illustration of a Western scholar-priest conversing with a Chinese scholar.[^11] 
As for the copy in the Vatican Library, its provenance remains uncertain. One view contends that it predates the Doctrina Christiana in the Library of Congress and the National Library of Spain. Unlike most officially approved publications which were dated, this book was not. According to the title page it was printed with licence, but the omission of the year of publication has led some to speculate that the work was printed before the necessary permit could be secured due to the urgent need to evangelise to the Chinese community. 
This view has been challenged by others who place the publication in the early 1600s based on studies of its linguistic and physical characteristics. Although its history cannot be conclusively determined, the identification of its printer, Keng Yong, throws a spotlight on the role that Chinese printers played in the development of early printing in the Philippines.[^12] 
