---
title: Maps as Statements of Power and Domination
date: 2021-08-02
permalink: /features/permalink
layout: post
---
#### Drawing from his personal collection of maps amassed over three decades, **Dr Farish A. Noor** invites us to truly read maps and look beyond their geographical boundaries.

Close-up of a Central Javanese batik embellished with a cosmological map motif. Courtesy Of Farish A. Noor.

I write this as an academic who also happens to be a collector Of antiquarian books, prints and maps of Southeast Asia. a hobby I have indulged in since my Late teens, and which has left me in a state of perpetual poverty as a result. Those who belong to this small fraternity Of aficionados will readily testify to the joy of collecting and the boundless pleasure of reading and appreciating books and maps that date back centuries. I am proud to say that although my passion has left me penniless, the state of destitution, thankfully, applies only to my wallet and not my sensibilities.

Antiquarian maps have long been sought after, for both their aesthetic as well as historical value. Those familiar with the workings of the antiquarian trade would know that such maps are also worthy investments in the long-run.

Having said that, the academic in me would also point to the academic worth of maps as documents of power and as records of the progression of power in the most comprehensive sense: both political - military as well as epistemic. Aside from the inherent beauty of some maps - and it should be noted that some antiquarian maps are undoubtedly visually stunning objects in themselves, deserving of appreciation as paintings and sculpture are - the added value of old maps is that they are historical records that document the march of exploration and conquest as well as the spread Of (geographic) knowledge of the world.

#### **MAPPING AND KNOWLEDGE: HOW WE COME TO KNOW THE WORLD**

In this essay I would Like to address the topic of maps and map-making and how maps can (and should) be read rather than simply merely looked at. By reading maps I mean that the map IS never simply a chart or a plan of territory, but also a statement (of intent or ambition) that can be interpreted and understood.

We need to begin with the premise that maps are never simply maps. Here is where we encounter the puzzle of maps and map making, and it is more an epistemic puzzle than a practical one. For if we were to start off with the Platonic premise that all forms of representation are merely that - representations of things as they really are — then all representations are to be regarded as counterfeit. What, then, is a map? And how do maps map the world? Granted that all maps are necessarily the product of human effort and are invariably tainted by subjective bias and the cultural perspectivism of the cartographer, they nevertheless need to correspond to some reality in order to fulfil their functions as maps that, well, map. But as representations of the world, maps merely stand for the "thing" that they represent. 

The philosopher Heidegger would interject by noting that the world of the thing-in-itself can never be known directly, but only through a (flawed, limited and subjective) human perspective. Taken In broad strokes, the upshot of this argument is that a map Of Asia therefore does not really "discover" Asia, but really invents Asia as it goes along.

Some might object to this argument on the grounds that maps illustrate things as they are in the world, but that misses the point: While it cannot be denied that things exist in the world, the more fundamental question is how those things come to be regarded as the things they are in the first place; which can only be a matter that is subjectively decided. For instance, elevations of earth and rock exist, but whether they exist as mountains or hills is a matter of subjective human judgement, and lie not in the things-in-themselves. There is, in fact. no universal standard that distinguishes the difference between hills and mountains, and the criteria differs from country to country. The American definition of a mountain is any land mass that rises to the height of a thousand feet. (610m) while in the United Kingdom, mountains need to be higher than two thousand feet (305m). (One country's mountain is another country's hill, evidently.)

That mountains are never simply mountains and that landscapes are never simply landscapes is evident when we compare the different modes of mapping that once existed in the world, prior to the advent of modern states and modern regimes of knowledge and power. Benedict Anderson (1983) notes that prior to Western colonialism in Southeast Asia, these societies had developed and used two types of native maps that were meaningful and relevant to their own needs: he cosmological map and the travel guide-map. In Anderson's words:
 
The "cosmograph" was a formal representation of the three worlds of traditional cosmology. The cosmography was not organised horizontally, like our own maps; rather a series of superterrestrial heavens and subterrestrial hells wedged in the visible world along a single vertical axis. It was useless for any journey save that in a search for salvation and merit. The second type. wholly profane, consisted of diagrammatic guides for military campaigns and coastal shipping. Organised roughly by the quadrant, their main features were written-in notes for marching and sailing times. required because the map-makers had no technical conception of scale... Neither type of map marked borders.<sup>2</sup>

The cosmological map that Anderson speaks of was common in Southeast Asia and can be seen in the motifs of Javanese batik cloth that were produced then and even now. Patterns such as lereng, cuwiri and wahyu tumurun repeat the cosmological ordering of the Javanese universe with the heavens above and hell below, with humankind residing in the material world of objects in between. The Javanese understanding of themselves and their place in the world was complex, and apart from the cosmological worldview that placed them in the natural material world - where gods and demigods interacted with and directed the affairs of human beings - the idea of "Javaneseness" was itself fluid and amorphous.

Such maps are hardly ever seen - much less used - these days, living as we do in a modern world that has been shaped and informed by our modern world-view and sensibilities. Across the post-colonial world. schools that teach cartography and mapping do so via the medium of the terrestrial map that charts out lands and seas. delineating borders of states and marking out the territory of respective nation-states, which remain the primary actors on the stage of global politics. Living as we do in the age of such nation-states, it is no wonder that our own understanding of geography and mapping has been shaped accordingly, and that the present generation of Asians are somewhat disconnected from earlier forms of mapping that were once familiar to their ancestors. But the questions arise: How did this modern form of mapping emerge and what can be said about modern maps and how they map the world? 


#### **MAPS AS A HISTORY OF IDEAS: HOW ASIA CAME TO BE KNOWN**

The maps that I have been collecting for more than three decades are almost entirely European or inspired by European cartography. Among the joys alluded to the map collector mentioned earlier is having the time to look at them at leisure and to discern the evolution of knowledge and mastery of the globe over the centuries. Beginning with some of the oldest maps in my collection such as Sebastian Münster's<sup>3</sup> maps Of Southeast Asia (1540) and Asia (1598), we can see how the world was perceived then. Münster's 1540 map Of Southeast Asia was Ptolemaic<sup>4</sup> in its inspiration, drawing from classical sources that suggested the world ended at the East and that there was no such thing as the Pacific Ocean. Among the quirks ofthe map are the obvious absence of Java, Borneo. Sulawesi and the rest Of the archipelago,and the fact that Southeast Asia was then referred to as Greater India or India Extra Gangem. In his later map of the Asian continent (1598), Münster gives us a glimpse of Asia - rendered more accurately this time - that is entirely bereft of borders, suggesting a fluidity of movement and contact that has been alluded to by scholars like K. N. Chaudhuri whose "Asia before the age of Europe" was indeed a seamless landmass where peoples, ideas and commodities moved with ease, and which long pre-dates our much-vaulted claims of globalisation and cosmopolitanism today.