---
title: Microfilm Collection and Services in the Lee Kong Chian Reference Library
permalink: /vol-2/issue1/apr-2006/microfilm-collection-service-library/
description: Microfilming the National Library’s collections began in the 1950s
  to preserve and archive Singapore’s documentary heritage. The collection
  includes newspapers; rare and out-of-print books; periodicals and directories;
  government publications; and dissertations.
---
#### Microfilming the National Library’s collections began in the 1950s to preserve and archive Singapore’s documentary heritage. The collection includes newspapers; rare and out-of-print books; periodicals and directories; government publications; and dissertations.

Microfilming the National Library’s collections began in the 1950s. It was initiated as a move to preserve and archive Singapore’s documentary heritage. Beginning with a collection of old newspapers and manuscripts, microfilming activities was stepped up to include the filming of government records, as well as rare and out-of-print Singapore materials.

Over the years, this collection was further enhanced through the addition of titles acquired from the British Library, Malaysian libraries, National University of Singapore Library, University Microfilms International and the Library of Congress. Today, the collection has grown to an extensive archive of 24,000 microfilm reels and 12,500 fiches that forms an integral part of the Singapore and Southeast Asian collections at the Lee Kong Chian Reference Library.

The collection, housed at Level 11 of the Lee Kong Chian Reference Library, is an invaluable and rich resource to many users, from the researcher of Singapore history, the student conducting social and business research, the heritage seeker pouring through Singapore’s earliest imprints and Jawi manuscripts, to the individual tracing his family roots.

The microform collection can be broadly categorised into newspapers, rare and out-of-print books, periodicals and directories, government publications and dissertations.

#### **Newspapers**
The most popularly used resource is the newspaper archives. The collection comprises approximately 100 Singapore/Malayan newspapers dating back to 1827 with the publication of *Singapore Chronicle and Commercial Register* (1827–1937). In addition to the English newspapers, papers in the vernacular, namely Chinese, Malay/Jawi, and the Indian languages (Tamil/ Malayalam/ Punjabi) are also represented.

The English-language press sources include major papers namely *The Singapore Free Press* (1835– 1869, 1884–1962), *The Straits Times* (1845–), *The Singapore Daily Times* (1865–1882), *The Malaya Tribune* (1914–1951), *The Syonan Shimbun* (1942–1945), *Singapore Standard* (1950–1959) and *The Singapore Herald* (1970–1971) amongst others. The collection also contains a host of short-lived papers such as *Times of Malaya* (1938–1939) and *Eastern Daily Mail* (1905–1908) which appeared during the early 20th century; *The Eastern Sun* (1966–1971) and *New Nation* (1971–1982) in the 1960s–70s; *The Singapore Monitor* (1982–1985) in the 1980s and more recently, *Project Eyeball* (2000–2001) and *Streats* (2003–2004). The library also acquires Malaysian newspapers with bearings on the history of Singapore. An example is *The Malay Mail* (1896–1981) which carried news on federal proceedings in Kuala Lumpur.

The early English papers catered to the European reader and were largely commercial in orientation. Common features include shipping news, commodity prices, commercial activities, advertisements and social news. It was only with the establishment of *Singapore Daily Times*, the second English daily in Singapore, that the press began to engage more deeply into politics. International news also increased in numbers and scope with *The Straits Times* subscription of the Reuters News Agency in 1870.

By the early 20th century, non-Europeans had established a number of English papers. One of the more successful ventures was *The Malaya Tribune* which was strong competitor to *The Straits Times*. Supported by Dr Lim Boon Keng and a group of prominent Chinese and Eurasians, *The Malaya Tribune* aimed “to express the views and aspirations of the domiciled communities”.

In the 1970s, the delicate political situation of post-independent Singapore saw the closure of a number of newspapers like *The Eastern Sun* and *The Singapore Herald*. In recent times, attempts have been made to diversify the newspaper business and to liberalise the Singapore media scene through the introduction of new papers like *The Singapore Monitor*, *The New Paper* (1988–), an afternoon tabloid, *Project Eyeball* which targeted the young, educated and savvy readers, and commuter papers like *Streats* (2003) and *Today* (2000–). All have since ceased publication, with the exception of *The New Paper* and *Today*.

Mirroring the increased development of Singapore, the vernacular presses flourished during the 1870s when the Straits Settlements came under the direct rule of the Colonial Office in London in 1867. The Library’s holdings of Malay newspapers include the first Malay newspaper published in Malaya, the *Jawi Peranakan* (1876–1895). Edited by Mohameed Said bin Dada Mahyiddin, a Penangborn Indian Muslim and teacher at the Raffles Institution, the paper was credited with raising the social awareness of the Malay community and promoting Malay education and language. Other titles in the collection include: *Lembaga Melayu* (1914–1931), a forward-looking and temperate newspaper which enjoyed a following amongst the urban middle-class Malays. The paper was edited by Mohammad Yunos bin Abdullah who is widely acknowledged as the father of Malay journalism; and *Warta Malaya* (1930–1941), an important vehicle for the discussion of Malay affairs, founded by the Alsagoff family and edited by Onn bin Jaafar who became one of the foundes of UMNO in 1951. Also within the Library's collection is one of the most complete runs of *Utusan Melayu* for the period  1945–1998 held in any Singapore library. *Utusan Melayu*, revived in 1938 by Yusof bin Ishak, Singapore's first Presidents, was the leading Malay newspaper in Singapore and Malaya after the war.

The Library's collection also houses a rich selection of Chinese newspapers.  It includes Le Bao (commonly known as Lat Pau) widely acknowledged as the first Chinese newspaper in Singapore.  The Library's holdings cover the period 1887–1932. Other leading Chinese newspapers also available are: *Xing Bao* [星报] (1890–1898), *Tian Nan XIn Bao* [天南新报] (1898–1905), *Jih Hsin Pao* [日新报] (1899–1901), *Zhong Hui Xin Bao* (Union Times) [中汇新报] (1906–1946), *Zhong Xing Ri Bao* [中兴日报] (1907–1957). These papers represented a variety of viewpoints and editorial stances concerning the events which were taking place in China. Earlier papers like *Le Bao* were generally conservative papers which supported the Manchu and British governments. Later papers positioned themselves as progressive publications which promoted reformation within the Chinese community. Chinese nationalism, Confucianism and even-pro-revolutionary ideas.  The other two major Chinese newspapers in the Library's collections are the *Nanyang Siang Pau* [南洋商报] (1923–1983) started in 1923 by Tan Kah Kee and *Sin Chew Jit Poh* [星洲日报] by "Tiger Balm King" by Aw Boon Haw in 1929.




