---
title: "Early Tourist Guidebooks: Willis’ Singapore Guide (1936)"
permalink: /vol-6/issue-3/oct-2010/Singapore-willis-tourist-guide/
description: Senior Librarian Bonny Tan examines the Willis’ Singapore Guide, an
  early tourist guidebook available at the National Library.
---
#### Senior Librarian _Bonny Tan_ examines the _Willis’ Singapore Guide_, an early tourist guidebook available at the National Library.

&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;“*There is much that is interesting, novel and exotic to be&emsp;<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;seen by the intelligent visitor…”*<br> &emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;(Willis, 1936, p. 83)

First published in April 1934, *Willis’ Singapore Guide*1 seemed to fly off the printing press, running into three editions within the first year of its publication.2 By its 6th edition in 1936, it had colour illustrations and was printed on art paper.3 Its cost invariably increased from 40 cents to a dollar. Each subsequent edition offered new insights into Singapore and its way of life. The fact that it was being distributed for free to visiting merchant ships by the chaplains for The Missions to Seamen certainly helped boost its circulation. A newspaper article promised that this budget guide to Singapore will introduce the “stranger to the city … what to see, where to go, and what is more, the cheapest way to do it.”4 Certainly, its tips for budget stays, cheap travel outside Singapore and local eats made it “the answer to the tourist’s desire for finding his way around town.”5 Unlike other turn of the century guides that were often targeted at the wealthy traveller, *Willis’ Singapore Guide* was written especially for the well-travelled but less well-to-do sailors to the East.

#### **The sailor’s welfare: The Missions to Seamen**

In the 1930s, Singapore was already considered one of the world’s largest ports with its role primarily as a clearing station. It served as an important coaling centre with nearly all of its coal used to fuel visiting ships (Willis, 1936, p. 79). Despite the large number of sailors passing through Singapore on various merchant ships, the welfare of seamen was not always a priority.

In 1926, The Missions to Seamen6 also known as Flying Angel was established in Singapore, headed by Rev. G. G. Elliot. It sought to become a home away from home for these itinerant seamen, providing everything from a roof over one’s head and a warm meal, to attending to stranded, ill or distressed sailors. John Ashley, an Anglican priest, founded the movement in 1837. When he was holidaying off Bristol, Ashley’s child inquired as to who ministered to the islanders across the Bristol Channel. The question led the priest to minister to the fishermen on the island and, subsequently, to the sailors on passing ships. In 1858, an Anglican entity named The Missions to Seamen was set up through an amalgamation of various ministries to seamen in Britain. Within six months, a request was made by concerned residents in Singapore for a Chaplain to minister to the spiritual needs of passing sailors.7 Although there were various forms of institutions and groups that served these sailors across several decades, it was more than half a century later, in 1926, when a monetary gift from a pilot’s widow for a Chaplain’s salary enabled The Missions to Seamen to take formal shape here.8

By 1935, 10,245 sailors had visited The Missions to Seamen.9 This was because the visits The Missions made to ships totalled 1,310, displaying a more than three-fold increase against 1927 when only 391 ships were visited.10 Initially, in 1927, attendance for entertainment was 1,500, but the numbers had risen to 10,245 in 1935, portraying close to a ten-fold increase.11 In 1932, despite the world’s trade being “at a phenomenally low level”, the chaplain still visited 800 vessels that year.12

Located at the famed Sailors Institute at Connell House along Anson Road for several decades, The Missions’ facilities in the 1930s included a restaurant, a cinema and even a milk bar.13 By 1947, it had a dance floor, a reading room, a library and tennis courts. The restaurant served between 7,000 to 10,000 meals a month with a full meal priced at a humble $1.14 Its hostel could initially accommodate 34 officers and 64 seamen, many of whom were awaiting transfers to other ships assigned to them. The hostel was so popular that by 1938, the Sailors’ Institute was known as the Marine Hostel.15 It was the activities and services that the Marine Hostel offered that kept drawing the sailors back to this, their second home. The recreational activities included not only standard games such as billiards, table tennis, draughts, darts and chess but also other activities which Rev A. V. Wardle summarises succinctly: “At the Marine Hostel officers and men could obtain board and lodging, get good meals at moderate prices, play games and write letters, attend whist drives and dances, where they meet women of their own nationality, see talkie cinema shows at least twice weekly, attend Sunday concerts where they very often hear the best talent in Singapore, and, perhaps best of all, they are certain of a warm welcome, without which bricks and mortar mean so little.”16

#### **The Marine Hostel’s Steward: A. C. Willis**

A. C. Willis was a key anchor to this “warm welcome” in his position as Steward of the Marine Hostel and later as Assistant Superintendant. He left his personal stamp on these activities, having served at the Marine Hostel for 21 years until his death in 1951. Willis’ success in entertaining the sailors was partly on account of his close identification with the needs of the sailors who visited the hostel as he had worked for more than 14 years previously with the Blue Funnel, rising to the rank of Quartermaster. “We aim to do all we can to make a man feel that this is his home while he is in port and it gives me great pleasure to do what I can for them, being an old sailor myself.”17

Under his able and fun-loving leadership, there was a “glut of games”18 amongst visiting seamen. Football proved especially popular with ships wiring messages prior to their arrival so they could be entered into a match.19 He also loved his food and had prepared 75 pounds of Christmas pudding for around 300 sailors in 1949, the most Christmas pudding prepared in post-war Singapore then.20 His only other known publication besides the Guide is a book of menus.21

Since Willis began work at the Marine Hostel in 1929, he had taken sailors around for tours of the city and beyond Singapore’s boundaries.22 At Johore they would visit pineapple farms, the Gunong Pulai water falls and Pontian Ketchil reservoir.23 In the 1930s, sometimes as many as a few hundred sailors would take the tour organised by the Seamen’s Institute.24 For example, in 1936, Willis took 700 American sailors from the United States Asiatic Fleet on tour through Singapore and beyond to Johore, Kota Tinggi and Pelepah Valley.25 Even as late as 1941, he accompanied sailors to Kota Tinggi where enroute, they stopped by pineapple plantations and rubber factories as well as tin mines.26 Willis’ passion and keen interest in travelling around Singapore and the Malay Peninsula gave shape to the *Guide* which he published on his own account.

#### **A sailor's Insight**

The guide begins with a brief historical prelude and proceeds to focus on the nuts and bolts of travel through Singapore and Malaya. Besides presenting tedious but essential details for the traveller, such as exchange rates and bank locations, Willis does offer details that are unique to the era and to the appetite of a sailor. It was, after all, written with the visiting seaman in mind, presenting the city to his interests and for his budget.

For example, he highlights the services provided and the role of the authorities that initially board the ship upon berthing. The police are the first to enter and inspect passports. They are followed by Indian money changers whom Willis suggests give better rates than those on shore. Then come hotel runners and baggage porters who offer to take one’s luggage safely to one’s preferred residence or hotel for a charge of merely 10 cents for each piece of luggage carried off the ship and an added 10 cents to accompany it to its destination.

Again, with deference to the seaman’s perspective and budget, besides a listing of well-known hotels, the guide also recommends several boarding houses like Sunnyside on Oxley Road, Whitehall on Cairnhill Road and Morningside on River Valley. Advertisements of these quaint boarding houses are accompanied by photographs and further details of their proprietors and the services they provide.

#### **A Taste of Local Cuisine**

Woven through his descriptions of places, Willis, ever the connoisseur of local cuisine, often mentions an eatery, its recommended house dishes and the restaurant’s unique ambience. Raffles Place, John Little and Robinsons’ were the main shopping haunts but Willis cannot resist noting that "\[at\] each is a comfortable lounge café, where one may indulge in tea, coffee, ices, alcoholic and other drinks in cool and restful ease. They also supply luncheons and light refreshments.” (Willis, 1936, p. 85). Even describing the shops along Battery Road, Willis slips in a note on “G. H.” Café, “an excellent place at which to get your luncheon and have that ‘one for the road’ before returning to the ship.” (Willis, 1936, p. 91).

Local food is also highlighted as he recommends the Oi Mee hotel for its good Chinese dinner (Willis, 1936, p. 40).

An entire chapter is dedicated to the Satai (Satay) Club, located along Beach Road between the Singapore Drill Hall and the Marlborough Picture Theatre (Shaw Towers). That it is mentioned in Willis’ 1936 guide quashes the commonly held belief that the Beach Road Satay Club was set up in post-war Singapore. This assumption may have arisen when the club relocated to Dhoby Ghaut in the 1950s because of frequent accidents occurring at the nearby Tay Koh Yat Bus Co terminus but poor business at that location led the Satay Club to return to Hai How Road (no longer in existence) where it had originally begun.27

Satay was already a popular snack, offered by itinerant vendors.28 Willis suggests that the term “satae” and the snack itself are of Chinese origin, the term believed to mean “three pieces of meat” in a Chinese dialect (Willis, 1936, p. 145), although at the SatayClub it is mainly Malays who whip up this dish from a simple wooden box. The box carries the ingredients for the dish — sticks of partly cooked chicken, beef or mutton which are then grilled over a charcoal fire. An unending round of satay is dished out until the patron asks to stop. The top of the box is used as a tray with three stools strewn around it. Spicy sauce and a relish with onions accompany the barbecued sticks of meat. Willis gives details of how *satay* is popularly consumed by westerners in these humble circumstances. “After the cinema or when hotels are closed, it is not an uncommon sight to see European ladies and gentlemen in evening dress sitting around these ‘Satai’ stalls on the open road.” (Willis, 1936, p. 147). “When you have finished eating, the Malay (cook) will collect the sticks which have been used, and charge you two cents for each. And when I tell you that I have known people to eat as many as forty, and even sixty sticks of Satai’ — and that’s a good pound of meat — at one sitting, you will understand that the dish is a popular one amongst Europeans, as well as others.” (Willis, 1936, p. 148).

#### **Negotiating Traffic**









