---
title: "Multi ethnic Enclaves Around Middle Road: An Examination of Early Urban
  Settlement in Singapore"
permalink: /vol-2/issue2/jul-2006/ethnic-enclave-urban-settlement/
description: Philip Jackson’s Plan of the Town of Singapore (1822) dictated the
  layout and structure of the town, and also designated special areas for the
  various ethnic groups that had settled in Singapore.
---
#### Philip Jackson’s&nbsp;_Plan of the Town of Singapore_&nbsp;(1822) dictated the layout and structure of the town, and also designated special areas for the various ethnic groups that had settled in Singapore.
 
Many former British colonies like the Straits Settlements and peninsular Malaya had attracted diverse peoples from neighbouring areas upon their colonisation and establishment with the prospect of employment and economic opportunities. The colony of Singapore, in particular, was a major destination for southern Chinese migrants. If textual accounts are anything to go by, the human landscape after its founding in 1819 was cosmopolitan in character, although the exponential immigration of Chinese groups and their eventual possession of various spheres of influence would alter the course of the island’s subsequent histories. Roland Braddell’s 1934 work *Lights of Singapore*, for example, described the early composition of the “white people” in colonial Singapore as consisting “English, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, Australians, New Zealanders, Canadians, Americans, Belgians, Danes, Dutch, French, Germans, Greeks, Italians, Norwegians, Portuguese, Russians, Spaniards, Swedes, Swiss and others” (Braddell, 1934:43–5). Braddell painted a similarly diverse composition of non-white communities on the island, but instead of country origin categorised them into particular ethnic groups and sub-groups as follows: 
 
“Malays”: “real” Malays, <br> 
Javanese, Boyanese, Achinese, <br> 
Bataks, Banjarese, Bugis, Dyaks, <br> 
Menangkabau, people <br> 
from Korinchi, Jambi, Palembang;<br><br> 
“Klings”: Tamils, Telugus, Malabaris;<br>  “Bengalis” include Punjabis, Sikhs,<br>  Bengalis, Hindustanis, Pathans,<br>  Gujeratis, Rajputs, Mahrattas,<br> Parsees, Burmese and Gurkhas;<br><br> 
“Asiatics”: Arabs, Singhalese,<br>  Japanese, Annamites, Armenians,<br>  Filipinos, Oriental Jews, Persians,<br>  Siamese and others;<br><br> 
“Chinese”: Hok-kiens, Teo-chius, <br>Khehs, Hok-Chias, Cantonese,<br> Hailams, Hok-Chius, and <br>Kwong-Sais.

The convergence of denominations and dialect identities within larger ethnic groups was an attempt by British administrator to cognise the multifarious communities, as well as a way to map, survey and control the groups. In the process, distinctions that existed between the different ethnic sub-groups were blurred or neutralised, as the use of such categories for control and spatial division disregarded both the hegemonies that existed between the different dialect settler groups, as well as the dynamic nature of multi-ethnic enclave formation and definition. This essay is an attempt to examine two such sub-groups that settled in Singapore in the 19th century, and to explore the shape of their enclaves and built-forms.

#### **The Early Ethnic Landscape**
The formation of early ethnic landscapes in Singapore may be attributed to the will of its colonial founder, Thomas Stamford Raffles, whose career straddled Penang, Bencoolen, Java and Singapore. While recuperating from illness in Malacca in 1808, Raffles, then an assistant secretary in Penang, drafted a report to his Government in India advising it not to abandon Malacca nor divert its trade to Penang, as other European or local powers would only capture it to the detriment of the British enterprise. The Governor-General was so impressed that Raffles was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Java at the age of 30. In 1818, Raffles was instructed to establish British interests in Acheh and in the Riau islands to further control trade in the Straits and to check Dutch encroachment. Arriving in Penang on December 31, he discovered that the Dutch had already occupied Riau, and was determined to stop their advance into Johore. Instead of travelling to Sumatra, he sidestepped protocol and sailed on his own accord to the island of Singapore, arriving there on January 28, 1819. Armed with the knowledge that the island was a thriving city until its destruction four and a half centuries ago, and assisted by his trusted former Malaccan colleague, Colonel William Farquhar, and ship carpenter, Chow Ah Chi, he signed a preliminary agreement with the Temenggong of Johore on January 30 to establish “a factory” on the island (Mills, 1867:60–69).

Raffles was aware of the shortcomings of Penang, Java and Bencoolen, and was determined that his next project would be financially and administratively viable to the directors of the East India Company. He thus advocated governing the island with a small, efficient establishment that worked with clear, effective decisions.1 Returning from Bencoolen in October 1822 after an absence of 39 months, he was thus annoyed that the first appointed British resident, William Farquhar, had not heeded his instructions regarding the layout of the settlement and allowed private individuals to occupy land on the northern bank of the Singapore River – areas he had designated for government use (Lee, 1983). Raffles had personally encountered the example of Penang, where undefined and unregulated landscapes worked against the administration. Within a week, he appointed a Town Planning Committee “in order to afford comfort and security to the different descriptions of inhabitants who have resorted to the Settlement and to prevent confusion and disputes hereafter”.2

Philip Jackson’s Town Plan of 1822 dictated the layout and structure of the city, but it also attempted to deal with the ethnic groups that had settled in Singapore.3 Raffles appointed the committee to mark out “the quarters or departments of the several classes of the native population,”4 and Jackson’s plan showed, on the southern banks of the Singapore river, an area designated for the Chinese, with “Chuliahs” and “Klings” allocated the area further inland on the same side of the river.5 On the northern banks, a “European Town” was marked out occupying the space between the “Government Area” adjacent to the river, and the Sultan’s properties to the northeast, which was flanked by an Arab and Bugis community on each side.

It was probable that funds for constructing public buildings were scarce. Hence, Raffles was prudent with his expenditure and commissioned, besides his residency on top of Forbidden Hill (Fort Canning Hill), only a school (The Institution, 1823) and a church (Saint Andrew’s Cathedral, 1835) on one side of an open field (the Padang today) and esplanade.6 John Crawfurd, the new resident that Raffles had appointed in 1823, could still not develop government buildings around the Padang but could, with the plan, lease land to merchants to build houses. The administration rented John Maxwell’s house for use as a Court House, Government Offices and Recorder’s Office for 500 rupees a month.7 Other houses belonging to Robert Scott, James Scott Clark, Edward Boustead and William Montgomerie around the Padang served as residences and hotels until the land tracts were acquired to build the Town Hall (1862), the Municipal Offices (1926–1929) and the Supreme Court (1939) to establish the government cantonment.8

#### **The “Smaller” Town**
Jackson’s 1822 plan for the European Town comprised four parallel roads laid out in the northeast-southwestern direction, and a major intersecting road. This perpendicular road is the present-day Middle Road, named because it either marked mid-distance between the Sultan’s residential compounds and the Government Area, or between the Rochore and Singapore rivers.

Despite the area’s allocation as European Town, it is likely that Europeans subsequently vacated it because of several reasons. Firstly, the number of Chinese immigrants, perceived as “an industrious race” (Logan, in Hodder, 1953:27) useful for the enterprise, increased from 3,317 persons in 1824 to 86,800 in 1881, many of whom were settling near or within the European Town (Chan, 1976:48). Chinese dialect groups that were not Hokkien, Teochew or Cantonese – the three earliest groups in the southwestern side of Singapore River – were settling on its other side.9 Secondly, with the interiors of the island rapidly cleared by gambier farming, European settlers were able to build their bungalow houses there, and to dwell away from the urbanising city quarters increasingly accommodating mercantile and non-white populations.10

In deference to the earlier Chinese Town on the other side of the river, this later settlement was known colloquially by the Chinese groups as *Xiao Bo* (Smaller Town) relative to its counterpart *Da Bo* (Larger Town).11 North Bridge Road and South Bridge Road were two parts of the same street (known as First Street or Big Street) connecting the two “towns” across the river. The parallel roads north of North Bridge Road in *Xiao Bo* were accordingly numbered, with Waterloo Street called Fourth Street and Short Street near Mount Sophia designated as Seventh Street.

Like the settlement patterns established in *Da Bo*, prestige, advantage and opportunities were associated with proximity to the British cantonment in *Xiao Bo*. The distances of these enclaves from the cantonment also indicated the history of their settlement and enclave formation. The Hainanese were the earliest settler group there, followed by the Hakka, Hokchia, Foochow and Henghua groups (Hodder, 1953:35 and Tan, 1986:29). Together with the “Malay,” “Indian” and “Arab” groups, a sprinkling of Hokkien, Teochew and Cantonese groups, as well as the European groups who continued to reside in these areas, a multi-ethnic and multi-religious landscape was established this side of the Singapore River.

#### **The Hainanese Community and Enclave**
Of the Chinese dialect groups that occupied areas northeast of the cantonment, the Hainanese community was the largest. Its enclave was adjacent to European churches, army camps and Raffles Hotel, and extended from the seashore along Beach Road westwards towards North Bridge Road.12 The three streets that run perpendicular to these two – Middle Road, Purvis Street and Seah Street – were respectively called Hainan First Street, Hainan Second Street and Hainan Third Street by the Hainanese and other Chinese communities, and a street recognition system different from their “official” designations was thus employed.

Small Hainanese trading vessels were known to have reached Singapore as early as 1821.13 The first settler was recorded as Lim Chong Jin, who arrived in Singapore in 1841 (Chan, 1976:48). By 1881, the Hainanese had constituted about 10 percent of the Chinese population, numbering 8,319 (Tan, 1986:29). As they were late on the scene and their enclave located further from the main godowns at the Singapore River, most Hainanese settlers worked as plantation workers or sailors. Others worked in servicerelated industries and operated provision shops, ship-chandling and remittance services, hotels and coffee shops.14 It was in the food “business” that would bring them most regional fame.15 Ngiam Tong Boon, a Hainanese bartender working at Raffles Hotel first concocted a gin tonic called “The Singapore Sling” in 1915. Nearby, Wong Yi Guan adapted a rice dish served with chicken, which was made famous by his apprentice Mok Fu Swee through his restaurant “Swee Kee Chicken Rice”. Later, this dish would be “re-exported” elsewhere in the region and East Asia as “Hainanese chicken rice”.16 It is also generally acknowledged that the Hainanese brewed the best coffee in Southeast Asia.

The main Hainanese association (Kiung Chow Hwee Kuan) and clan temple building was built in 1857 in three adjoining shophouses along Malabar Street.17 In 1878, it moved to its present location along Beach Road, and later underwent renovations in 1963. The Hainanese in Singapore were a close-knit and clannish society, as evidenced by the compulsory social initiation of new migrants, as well as the welfare and clan practices provided by the community within the enclave (Chan, 1976:50). Besides the main association and temple complex at Beach Road,21 additional sub-clan associations can be found along the three main streets, differentiated not only by origin district on Hainan island, but also in combination with clan surnames.18

The location of the enclave, edged by a major street (Middle Road) and the water’s edge with a docking pier and communal facilities, ensured the general prosperity of the enclave until the 1980s, when urban renewal decanted a large portion of its original residential community. By this time, the population had grown and dispersed, mainly to villages and estates all over the island.




