---
title: "Picturing an Island Colony: A Short History of Photography in Early Singapore"
permalink: /vol-3/issue4/jan-2008/photography-island-colony-history/
description: Traces Singapore’s photographic history and highlights three
  specific titles relating to early Singapore’s photographic past.
image: /images/Vol 3 Issue 4/PhotgraphyHistory/photography1.jpg
---
####  Traces Singapore’s photographic history and highlights three specific titles relating to early Singapore’s photographic past.

Before embarking on a journey through time into the world of photography in mid-19th century Singapore, the birth of modern photography deserves a brief mention. Photography as it is understood and practised today – made possible by the scientific discovery of methods to permanently fixate images directly formed by light onto either metal or paper – did not come into being until the 19th century. Many writers conventionally hail Frenchman Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre (1787–1851) and William Fox Talbot (1800–1877) in Britain as the founding fathers of modern photography. Daguerre and Talbot were the first to announce their findings publicly in 1839, though they were certainly not alone in the quest to permanently capture fleeting images.1 Daguerre, after years of experimentation (much of it in collaboration with fellow contemporary Joseph-Nicéphore Niépce, 1765–1833), had taken his first successful photograph in 1837, which he proudly named after himself – the Daguerreotype, though it would be another two years before his invention was publicly announced. William Talbot’s photographic process became known as the Calotype or Talbotype. His photographic technique, which became involved in the making of multiple positive prints from paper negatives, is significant because it paved the way for the development of modernday photography.2

It is not known for sure when photography first arrived in Singapore. The earliest known daguerreotypes of the settlement were created by a Frenchman named Jules Itier (1802–1877), who first set foot in Singapore in July 1844 as part of a French commercial mission to Asia. Besides recording his impressions of the British colony in a journal (which was subsequently published in Paris in 1848, entitled Journal d’un voyage en Chine en 1843, 1844, 1845, 1846), Itier also photographed the island, producing a number of quarter-plate (8.3 x 10.5) daguerreotypes of the town area, including that of the Singapore River from Government Hill (present-day Fort Canning). Today, this daguerreotype is part of the collection at the National Museum of Singapore.3

This photographic history of colonial Singapore begins with Gaston Dutronquoy, a native of Jersey,4 who arrived in Singapore in March 1839.5 Starting off as a portrait painter and miniaturist (his advertisement, dated 27 March 1839, first appeared in the weekly *Singapore Free Press and Mercantile Advertiser* on 11 April6 ), he is more popularly known as the proprietor of the London Hotel, which first opened at High Street in May 1839.7 It was in the London Hotel that Dutronquoy commenced his photographic business, first advertising himself as a daguerreotypist in the *Singapore Free Press* on 4 December 1843.

Dutronquoy’s assurance to potential customers that “a sitting can have their likenesses taken” in just two minutes was probably not exaggerated as by 1840, technical improvements made to the daguerreotype process had reduced exposure times from ten minutes to just one minute.8 Nevertheless, his advertisement is a little misleading, because it does not sufficiently inform patrons about the entire posing process, which certainly took longer than two minutes. A detailed description of a Daguerrian photoshoot provided by art historian Dr Naomi Rosenblum, based on an 1843 image entitled “Jabez Hogg making a portrait in Richard Beard’s studio”, gives readers an idea of what a Dutronquoy’s assurance to potential customers that “a sitting can have their likenesses taken” in just two minutes was probably not exaggerated as by 1840, technical improvements made to the daguerreotype process had reduced exposure times from ten minutes to just one minute.8 Nevertheless, his advertisement is a little misleading, because it does not sufficiently inform patrons about the entire posing process, which certainly took longer than two minutes. A detailed description of a Daguerrian photoshoot provided by art historian Dr Naomi Rosenblum, based on an 1843 image entitled “Jabez Hogg making a portrait in Richard Beard’s studio”, gives readers an idea of what a typical sitting in Dutronquoy’s studio might have been like:

*A tripod – actually a stand with a rotating plate – supports a simple camera without bellows. It is positioned in front of a backdrop … The stiffly upright sitter \[or sitters\] … is \[or are\] clamped into a head-brace, which universally was used to ensure steadiness. He clutches the arm of the chair with one hand and makes a fist with the other so that his fingers will not flutter. After being posed, the sitter remains in the same position for longer than just the time it takes to make an exposure, because the operator must first obtain the sensitised plate from the darkroom (or if working along, prepare it), remove the focusing glass of the camera, and insert the plate into the frame before beginning the exposure … In all, the posing process was nerve-wrecking and lengthy, and if the sitter wished to have more than one portrait made the operator had to repeat the entire procedure, unless two cameras were used simultaneously – a rare occurrence except in the most fashionable studios*.9

Some individuals who had their pictures taken at Dutronquoy’s daguerreotype studio might have shared the same sentiments as Ralph Waldo Emerson, an American author, poet and philosopher, who had this to say about posing in front of the camera:

<i> In your zeal not to blur the image, did you keep every finger in its place with such energy that your hands became clenched as for fight or despair, and in your resolution to keep your face still, did you feel every muscle becoming every moment more rigid; the brows contracted into a Tartarean frown, and the eyes fixed in it, in madness, or in death? </i>10

Photography in 19th century Singapore was also done outdoors, though it is not known whether Dutronquoy provided such a service for customers wishing to have their pictures taken outside the studio. The Hikayat Abdullah, the autobiography of early 19th century Malay writer Abdullah Abdul Kadir (better known as Munshi Abdullah), gives a vivid eyewitness account of a daguerreotype being made by an unidentified American doctor on Bonham’s Hill (what is today Fort Canning Hill) in around 1841:

<i> … I walked up the hill, and the others joined us there. I saw the doctor go into a room and bring out a box. The box had an attachment like a telescope. The lens, about the size of a cent piece, could be pulled outwards. It had two components, the larger one inside. This larger lens magnified anything seen in front of it. One side of the box could be opened and closed. Then the doctor went and fetched a metal plate about nine inches long by six inches wide, thin and brightly polished. He rubbed the surface with a certain kind of reddish-coloured powder until it was a dull brown all over. Then he took a bowl which had been filled with another kind of powder, black in colour. He held the polished plate about four inches above the powder. After about ten minutes he lifted up the plate, and its colour had turned to a reddish gold. He took the plate and put it into the extensible box, which he then placed with the side of the apparatus with a sliding lens in the direction in which he wished to take the picture. The image of the scene passed through the lens and struck the plate. He said, “In strong sunlight it takes only a moment, but in a dull light it takes a little longer.” After this he took the metal plate out and we noticed that there was nothing visible on it at the time. He then took it to a place in a shade and washed it with a chemical solution. Now he had a kind of frame with a vessel containing quicksilver fitted underneath it. He mounted the plate in position on top of the vessel, about six inches above the surface of the quicksilver. Below the vessel there was a spirit lamp which he lit. The quicksilver soon became hot and gradually its vapour rose and was allowed to condense on the plate for a certain length of time. Now the chemical with which the plate had been treated etched all the parts on which light had fallen, while it had not affected those parts on which no light had fallen. After a timed interval the plate was lifted out and at once we saw a picture of the town of Singapore imprinted on it, without deviation even by so much as the breadth of a hair, a fine reproduction of the actual scene. The plate with the picture on it was used as a block, and by contact with its surface prints were easily taken which faithfully reproduced the original without variation. </i>11

Another pioneer who worked with the daguerreotype camera was J. Newman, an American traveller who visited Singapore between 1856 and 1857. Although his stay in Singapore was short-lived, he played an important role in promoting the use of the daguerreotype in the settlement. As expressed by John Falconer, Newman’s advertising approach “is characterised by a much more positive and 




