---
title: "Then and Now: The Keramat Phenomenon in Singapore"
permalink: /holding-area/chapters-on-asia-2024/keramat-phenomenon-singapore/
variant: markdown
description: ""
---
Singapore once abounded with *keramat* that ranged from sturdy structures, such as the Keramat Iskandar Shah* at Fort Canning, to simple roadside shrines, such as the vanished Orang Halus* *keramat* at the Havelock Road Police Station.  Sadly, most of these *keramat* were demolished over the past half century to make way for development. The most recent of these demolitions, Keramat Siti Mariam in Kallang*, was followed by an exhibition at the National University of Singapore’s museum in 2011, but most of the demolitions were carried out without much notice.

*Keramat* represent physical markers of Singapore’s history as a maritime trading centre, yet they are also focal points for the communities in which they stood, offering a sanctified space where people could seek solace or ask for dispensation or intervention in personal problems. Maintained by self-appointed caretakers, each *keramat* has folklore that interweaves historical facts with a syncretic spirituality mirroring the sensibilities of the community.

This paper will offer a brief of analysis of the various types of keramat that were once found across Singapore, including *keramat hidup* or living *keramat*, *datuk keramat*, grave-shrines or shrines that resemble graves, and authentic graves. It concludes by examining how, for instance as vernacular culture, *keramat* often have fraught relationships with authority, both religious and secular.        

#### **What’s a Keramat?**
*Keramat* are sacred objects that possess a special energy known as *semangat*. These may be natural objects like trees, rocks, termite mounds, whirlpools, waterfalls; living animals; living people; graves of *wali* or venerated persons; old graves of unknown origin; spirits of animals or holy men; or a combination thereof. 

Each *kerama*t is unique, yet different ethnic groups may have varying perspectives on a single *kerama*t. It was common for a *keramat* to have multiple identities: names, ages, origins, and even genders could change over time. 

However, some *keramat* have maintained relatively stable identities over the decades. It is perhaps not a coincidence that most of these tend to be the *keramat* that still exist, for instance, Habib Nuh*, Iskandar Shah, Radin Mas* and Tok Lasam*.

While the *keramat* tradition is rooted in the Islamic culture of the region, the relationship between *keramat* and Islam is complex. Some modern Muslims are regular devotees at *keramat*, while others consider them to be idolatrous. The belief of most Muslims I spoke with falls somewhere between these two polarities. 

In the simplest sense, *keramat* are grounded in a localised version of Islam that incorporates Sufi practices from the Hadhramout (a region in Yemen) filtered through South Asia. Some *keramat* demonstrate a syncretic blend of Taoist, Hindu and local animistic practices. There is also a tradition of Baba Chinese *keramat* that invoke spirits with Muslim/Malay names and iconography.

Some *keramat* are known for special powers such as helping to conceive children or granting winning lottery numbers, and specific offerings, like tying stones to nearby trees or railings, are made at these shrines.

#### **Types of Keramat**
<u>Living Keramat</u><br> 
*Keramat hidup*, literally “living *keramat*”, are not magicians but rather a type of saint who can perform miraculous feats such as teleportation, mind-reading, fortune-telling and healing the sick. C.O. Blagden mentioned a living keramat in his letter published in Walter Skeat’s seminal (if problematic) 2005 study *Malay Magic*: 

“I remember, in 1895, hearing of a little girl, living with her parents at Sungei Baru in the Alor Gajah district of Malacca, who was reputed to be *kramat*.  People used to travel considerable distances to visit her, and thereby gain some benefit or other. I was informed that the modus operandi was to swallow a small quantity of her saliva in a cup of water, but I never verified this statement.” 

Within the Islamic tradition, living *keramat* may be considered as *wali*, friends of God. Some of these people are known to be pious ascetics, while others merge with a South Asian tradition of “mad *fakirs*”, holy men who behave outrageously yet whose behaviours are tolerated as acts of the venerable. After death, the graves of such men may become *keramat*, the *wali* continuing to meditate and hear requests for intercession after his or her demise. It is said that *keramat* never die – energy cannot be destroyed.

In Singapore, the most famous *keramat* hidup is Habib Nuh, the “grand saint of Singapore”.  The biography of this man is vague. At his death in 1866, newspapers referred to him as “an old Kling man” who styled himself as Nabi Noah (Prophet Noah), who died in a house at Tanjong Pagar and was buried on a hill in the nearby cemetery.  In 1880, the owner of this burying ground declared a *wakaf* (land donated by a pious person and maintained by trustees) in the name of Habib Nuh bin Muhammed Puteh Alhabshi. Later that decade, an elaborate tomb was erected by Syed Mohamed bin Ahmad Alsagoff (1836–1906), a leading figure in the Muslim business world of Singapore and one of the original trustees of the *wakaf*. This tomb near Palmer Road remains the largest and most popular *keramat* on the island and attracts visitors from around the Muslim world.

Habib Nuh was not the only *keramat hidup* found in Singapore, nor were they always Muslims. In 1939, the *Sunday Tribune* featured an article about a 65-year-old Hindu man considered “Kramat Idop”. He was known as Swamy Kalian, and devotees, both Chinese and Malay, thronged his domicile on Mohamed Sultan Road. The article noted that “[e]verything in the *kramat* is primitive in the extreme. Three little bamboo huts and a pen about 15 feet long and just broad enough for two people to stand abreast in, are the only semi-permanent structures that this *kramat* contains”.  After living at this location for 30 years, it was said that one day the Swamy received “a visitation from the deity who watches over the premises during which he was told that from that day he would have the power to heal the sick, give sight to the blind, make the dumb talk, set cripples erect and raise the bedridden.” The deity instructed him not to accept money from his patients – a noble endeavor, although the treatments often involved slapping and hair pulling. 

While it is unclear if the deity who appeared to Swamy Kalian was a *keramat* or a Hindu god, it was believed that people could become *keramat hidup* through their interaction with a *wali*, often through a dream in which the saint revealed the location of his tomb. These people then became the caretakers of the *wali*’s *keramat* and could even become *keramat* themselves. 

One such person was Oli Chivli Kutti Mamoo, an Indian immigrant to Singapore who opened an *unani* pharmacy (a form of traditional medicine practiced by South Asian Muslims) on Arab Street in the 1920s. He named the pharmacy Bismillah Wali* (friend of God most merciful), a moniker he took on after a *wali* named Syed Mustapha revealed in a dream the location of his grave at an isolated bend of Upper Changi Road. Bismillah Wali bought the land in the 1930s and built an elaborate *keramat* for Syed, then moved his pharmacy to the site. He soon acquired a reputation as a *keramat hidup*. The sort of miracles attributed to Habib Nuh are lacking in the Bismillah Wali story, which took place well into the era of radio and television: his powers were more attuned to his knowledge of esoteric pharmacology and prognosticating winning lottery numbers.  After he died in 1962, Bismillah Wali was given special permission to be buried beside Syed Mustapha, and both were exhumed and reburied together in one grave at Pusara Abadi cemetery at Chua Chu Kang when the land was cleared for a public housing estate in 1979.

While the designation *keramat hidup* is usually reserved for humans, animals can also be living keramat, although the distinction could be blurry as there are stories of *keramat hidup* who could transform into tigers and even lead an entire village of were-tigers.  Tigers and crocodiles – big predators who could also function as guardian spirits – were often considered *keramat*. However, any animal could be especially so if they were albino, deformed (such as being club-footed) or able to escape easily from traps. 

Animals in both corporeal and spirit forms are frequently seen near keramat, including a three-legged tiger at Radin Mas, a white tiger at Iskandar Shah, a white crocodile at Jangal Pir*, a black cobra at Keramat Maliki, a snake half-brother of the caretaker at Keramat Siti Mariam in Kallang, and a fierce black turkey at Dato Mulia*. *Keramat* are also known for attracting huge flocks of pigeons.

<u>Datuk Keramat</u>

Natural objects charged with *semangat* are said to have a *keramat* spirit that dwells within them. Another type of nature spirit in Malay folklore is known as *penunggu*, a type of unfriendly guardian spirit that should be avoided. *Datuk keramat*, on the other hand, are Islamic* jinn* (spirits), and deference must be paid to them.* Datuk*, the Malay word for grandfather, is also a generalised honorific for an elder male, and the word is used by both Malay and Chinese in Malaya to refer to such spirits (also transliterated as *datok*, *Dato* or *Tok*). 

Datuk keramat is closely linked to the Malayan Chinese tradition of *datuk kong* (拿督公, *nadu gong*) where localised nature spirits are often represented by icons that resemble older Malay men, although in some cases they appear as other ethnicities and even animals. *Kong* is the Hokkien word for grandfather, yet there is also a tradition of *datuk nenek*, or female *datuk* spirits (*nenek* is the Malay word for grandmother and more generally for ancestors). 

Intriguingly, these spirits are often given names and personalities. Sometimes these figures are semi-mythical ancestors, and in other cases they are the embodied spirits of *wali*. One current example is Keramat Datuk Syed Sulieman, a *datuk kong* shrine at Dempsey Hill at the base of a large banyan tree. This is primarily a Chinese shrine that includes an icon of Guanyin, yet devotees are asked not to offer pork or alcohol as the resident spirit is Muslim.  

Sometimes these *datuk* shrines include a “grave” for the *keramat* spirit. One such shrine, known as Rumah Miskin* (after the nearby Tan Tock Seng charity hospital), developed beneath a jackfruit tree (descriptions vary) within the grounds of the police station, which once stood at the corner of Balestier and Serangoon roads. Descriptions of the *keramat* shrine at the base of the tree date back to at least 1939, and intriguingly an older name for this area was *mang ka-kah*, which in Hokkien and Teochew means “jackfruit leg”, or “in the shadow of the jackfruit tree”.  

In 1954, this shrine was identified as the grave of one Siti Mariam, the eldest of the Tiga Adik Beradik Keramat, three sisters buried within or beside police stations along Serangoon Road. “The feature of Siti Mariam’s tomb is that a bole of an old jackfruit tree grows out its center and protrudes through the zinc roof. The tree rarely bears fruit but when it does, the fruit is said to be the sweetest one can eat.”  Yet another story has the grave belonging to an Arab *wali* named Syed Zahid, though this version appears not to have been very popular.

The *keramat* sisters of Serangoon Road were joined in the 1980s by another named Siti Subaida, whose “grave” located nearby was a large mound of earth, shaped like a frog, also marked as a *datuk kong*. This expanding *keramat* family was said to include the *datuk keramat* at Kusu Island*, Syed Abdul Rahman, and the adjacent *datuk nenek* shrines of his wife and sister (or mother and daughter, depending on the version). 

*Datuk keramat* also inhabited rocks and whirlpools. In the 1920s, R.O. Winstedt noted a Dato Berhala near a whirlpool on the Perak River. While mourning his wife, Embun, who had disappeared after going to bathe near a big rock, the Dato also disappeared. For boatmen, prayer at the *keramat* rock ensured safe passage through this rough stretch of water, while forgetting to propitiate the *datuk* could bring disaster. 

In 1960, the *Singapore Free Press* reported the existence of Dato Sungei Bangkong at Pasir Panjang. Local Malay and Chinese fishermen believed this “old Malay kramat laut (sea saint)” protected them from storms and granted good luck with lottery numbers. His shrine was in a whirlpool near the mouth of Sungei Bangkong, where fishermen “offered him their gifts and prayers”.  

While propitiating natural threats, be they whirlpools or crocodiles, seem like an obvious social use of *datuk keramat*, English doctor and curator and director at Raffles Museum Carl Alexander Gibson-Hill (1911–63) suggested yet another function – as navigation marks. Gibson-Hill was keenly interested in nautical technology and cartography, and his notion has merit.  In her study of sacred rocks in Southeast Asia, Monica Janowski points out the frequency of coastal areas with megalithic sites – and to this I would add oddly formed or monumental natural objects – that are said to be *keramat* graves of princes or princesses. Janowski also notes the gendering of such places, with recumbent stones near water often considered as female.  

Much like indigenous Australian songlines, assigning stories and identities to natural features creates an oral map useful for navigation, as if to say “this island marks the entrance to the strait but is surrounded by dangerous shallow coral around the tanjong on which the Javanese princess is buried”. One such site was a stone outcropping on the southern coast of Pulau Ubin that resembled a recumbent figure. It was later identified as Keramat Puteri Jawa*, the grave of a princess from Java who fled to Pulau Ubin a hundred years before.

This shrine was also considered *datuk* by the local Chinese. After the rocky outcropping was blasted away by quarrying works, the shrine was rebuilt and dedicated to an entity identified as a *datuk* maiden (拿督姑娘, *nadu guniang*) named Yantikakak. The name Yanti is traditionally associated with pretty girls, while *kakak* (meaning elder sister) is an honorific for older women of a high status. However, she is better known today as the German Girl, who supposedly fell to her death when her parents were taken prisoner by British soldiers during the First World War. An urn said to hold her mortal remains stands on the altar beside a Buddha and a Barbie doll: a perfect fusion of *datuk* worship and local folklore. 

However, not all *datuk* shrines in Singapore began as* keramat* nature shrines. Shrines to *datuks* could be built far from their original *keramat*. A shrine was built in Siglap for Datok Machap, a keramat near Malacca (in Malaysia) popular with Baba Chinese. Devotees brought earth from the original keramat grave and constructed a grave-shrine. The shrine also included icons for deities named Kramat Ga’ong Sembilan and Datok Siti Esah.  These were spirits from the Baba Chinese *mambang* pantheon that often bore names with Muslim connotations, such as Datok Nenek Semilan Puloh Semilan Lengkong, translated roughly as “old fairy of 99 crescents”. There are 99 holy names for the Prophet, and the crescent motif has long been a symbol of Islam. 

Not far away in Katong in Singapore, a shrine was built for a popular *datuk keramat* from Pulau Besar, near Malacca. In this instance, the deity was renamed as Sam Poh Neo Neo, and the shrine included an icon for his sister and another related entity named Datuk Bakul, or “*datuk* of the basket”, which was represented on the altar by an anthropomorphized cloth-covered basket.

<u>Grave-shrines and Pseudo Keramat</u>

In his 2003 study, P.J. Rivers uses the term “pseudo *keramat*” to describe artificial graves. The word “pseudo” suggests a degree of authenticity, with some keramat more or less authentic than others, but who is to judge this quality? As noted, grave shrines may be placed at *datuk keramat* such as trees or rocks, and observers may go away believing they are either real graves or deliberate fakes. This situation is not new. 

In 1845, an anonymous contributor wrote to the *Singapore Free Press and Mercantile Advertiser* to complain about the practice of setting up “pretended” *keramat*. This “knavery” was often perpetuated under the “pious care of Klings” who took advantage of “credulity and superstition” to reap a “handsome subsistence from the offerings of devotees at the [false] tombs”.  The writer described a recently erected *keramat* in the Tanglin District on which the plaster was not yet dried:

“It is in full operation, however: a large flag staff has been erected, and a box for the receptable of donations established. […] The parties in attendance said that the spot had been revealed lately to a just man in a dream by the shade of the deceased saint who had indicated the spot where his bones rested.”  

The writer concluded indignantly that the “police ought really to look sharp after such imposters”. 

Important information lurks beneath the condescending colonial tone. The mention of “Klings”, or South Asians, in the newspapers is particularly intriguing. This would suggest the grave-shrine was not a *datuk keramat* but originated within a South Asian tradition of building roadside shrines that resembled graves. This could be done deliberately for an existing saint, or, as in the case of Bismillah Wali discussed earlier, indicate the grave of a saint who had visited a devotee in a dream.

As Torsten Tschacher has shown, “saint-veneration was already an established practice among the various ethnic groups that came to form Singapore’s Muslim community”, and further, that “in contrast to the more rural areas of the Malay world, Singaporean saint veneration developed in a truly transnational context, and it reflects this context through the large number of non-Malay Muslims that came to be venerated as saints on the island”.  

An example of this phenomenon is the elaborate grave-shrine built at Telok Ayer Street (which at the time faced the sea) by Chulia (Tamil-Muslim) traders for the saint Shah al-Hamid of Nagore between 1828 and 1830. A national monument since 1974, this shrine, called Nagore Dargah, was considered a keramat by some devotees before the grave-shrine was revamped as a museum.  

There were other less elaborate grave-shrines, built not by prosperous South Asian traders but rather by convicts employed in building infrastructure or by Bengali troops stationed here. The *keramat* at the 8th milestone on Bukit Timah Road* likely began as such a shrine. South Asian convict labour was used to build Bukit Timah Road in the early 1800s, and residential quarters specially constructed for convicts appeared in an 1844 map near modern Bukit Panjang, not far from the *keramat* site.  S. Ramachandra, who visited the site as early as 1919, believed the *keramat* “existed before Bukit Timah Road was completed in 1848”.  

Dedicated to a saint named Habib Ismail, it was also known as “Nasoor”, “Nagol” and “Nagoor”, connecting it to Shah al-Hamid of Nagore. One of the earliest Islamic devotional poems written in Tamil in Singapore, dating from 1886, eulogises a Shaykh Isma’il whose *keramat* grave can be found on Pulau Besar in Malaysia.  This name was also associated with a *keramat* at Ann Siang Hill* that was South Asian in form.

There was also a large Hindu following at this shrine. A photo essay in the *Malayan Saturday Post* in 1928 marvelled at Hindu workers walking all the way from the Tanjong Pagar docks to visit a “Mohamedan shrine”.  The shrine remained popular with Hindus until its exhumation and relocation to Pusara Abadi cemetery in 1992.

Another vanished *keramat* that was likely built by either convicts or soldiers was found on a slope overlooking Pulau Saigon, which was an island in the Singapore River near present day Clemenceau Bridge, near a government gunpowder magazine. The *keramat* first appeared on a map dated 1842, making it one of the oldest on historical record. In 1939, it was named as the *keramat* of Jangal Pir.  The 1954 *Singapore Street Directory* described the *keramat* as “Indian in form”. *Pir* is the South Asian word for a Sufi spiritual guide, and there was shrine to a Jangal Pir in Boalkhali, Bangladesh in 1725.  Yet this long-lived *keramat* took on other identities. It was the grave of Tukang Jala, “master fisherman” in Malay (*jala* is type of fishing net), an apt name given its proximity to the river. Intriguingly, both names were in use when the *keramat* was demolished to make way for public housing in the early 1970s. 

Back in 1845, the writer’s concern was that caretakers built “pretend” *keramat* graves (“pseudo” in Rivers’s terminology) to profit from superstition, but there are other reasons for building such *keramat*. The most recent *keramat* in Singapore can be found in a carpark off Turf Club Road. Said to be the grave of an unnamed holy woman who died in the 16th century, it only appeared in the mid-2010s.  It has since grown considerably and now includes electric lights and a refrigerator. The caretaker of this site, a young woman who calls herself Putri, told the Urban Explorers of Singapore that after a groundskeeper at the Turf Club told her about the grave, she took it upon herself to build the *keramat*, explaining that after a difficult youth, she was dedicating her life to Islam.  

For the writer in 1845, this would have been clearly a “pretend” *keramat*, merely a cynical cash grab. However, for the caretaker who claims a closer relationship with Islam through her devoted work, the spirituality of the keramat she built is both vital and valid.



     