---
title: "In the Family: Family History Resources in the National Library"
permalink: /vol-8/issue-3/oct-dec-2012/family-history-national-library/
description: Tracing our family history can be a slow and laborious process. The
  National Library has various resources to help the researcher complete the
  journey of discovering one’s roots.
---
#### Tracing our family history can be a slow and laborious process. The National Library has various resources to help the researcher complete the journey of discovering one’s roots.

#### **Grandfathers’ Stories**

The best place to begin exploring one’s family history is one’s own family, both immediate and extended. Talking to elderly relatives is an intimate process that reveals lost names, fleshes out characters and unravels hidden stories. It is not always easy to interview those who are most familiar to us. Techniques in interviewing relatives and fishing for treasured nuggets in family histories are explained in publications such as Verde’s *Touching tomorrow* (2000) which sees the process of the oral interview as a gift for the whole family. As families share, they invariably uncover photographs, memorabilia and letters. These become touchstones, triggering memories in others or carrying new information, often of a more personal nature.

Keeping familial records, photographs and ephemera organised is just as important as developing a strategy for research. The process is often tedious and an art in itself. One useful guide for newcomers is Taylor’s *Preserving your family* (2001) which outlines, in detail, the process of restoring and organising old photographs.

Chatting with aged relatives, leafing through old letters and documents, analysing photographs and examining family heirlooms can open doors to hidden branches of one’s family tree.

#### **Beginning with the End**

A name with a birth or death date is the first step in fleshing out details of a member in the family tree.1 Sometimes starting with the end may prove more profitable than trying to trace the beginning. Often a deceased who has just passed away is still remembered by surviving family members who can recall events and details associated with the individual. A simple obituary in the newspaper or community newsletter can reveal a slew of other names and relationships, of sons and daughters, grandsons and nephews. More established patriarchs (or matriarchs) may have eulogies published.

Persistence and creativity are important keys for dredging up information of our ancestors. Vernacular names are often mispronounced and their spellings confused. Even with a searchable database, variant names, acronyms, and spellings should be attempted before giving up the search. Etchings of names on headstones are important clues that can move the research forward. Birth dates, places of birth, aliases or commendations are often gleaned from gravestones. There are publications which have transcribed details of the tombstones of the early colonialists.2 Burial registers and exhumation records are also invaluable sources of information. Donated by Kuan Swee Huat, the Hokkien Huay Kuan Exhumation Records, spanning 1948-1951 and 1936-1965 list some 10,000 Chinese graves exhumed from Redhill around the 1960s. They carry information such as the date of exhumation and burial, name, sex, dialect group of the deceased, and names of their descendants.

Legal papers such as petitions, writs of summons, power of attorney, property ownership, wills and testaments such as those in the collections of Koh Seow Chuan,3 can throw much light on a family’s genealogy. The handwritten will and testament of well-known philanthropist Tan Kim Seng dated 1862, for example, revealed not only the wealth of the deceased, but also his descendants and beneficiaries, many of whom were well-known in their own capacity.

*The Straits Times* and *The Singapore Free Press* are fully searchable on NewspaperSG, an online archive of Singapore news. Dating back to the mid-19th century, these newspapers carry announcements of births, marriages and deaths, with more details for well-known people. Passenger lists are also published sometimes, giving information on a person’s destination, place of embarkation and the ship’s name. Another useful source of information comes from notices of exhumation published in these dailies. Other language newspapers such as *Berita Harian*, *Nanyang Siang Pau*, *Sin Chew Jit Poh* and *Tamil Murasu* are also available through this portal although they were published much later and may have less to offer. Available on microfilm are other dailies such as the *Malaya Tribune*, the *Singapore Herald* and the S*ingapore Standard* which are alternative sources of news.

Whole donations of records, photographs and books with connections to well-known families such as the Wong Ah Fook Collection, the Wang Tso and Hsiu Chin Collection and the Wu Lien-Teh Collection are also gems to family historians of these pedigree families. The collection of Wong Ah Fook (1837-1918) donated by his great-granddaughter Datin Patricia Lim includes genealogies, wills, archival records, photographs, account books, press cuttings, maps and publications related to the family’s history. Mr Wang Tso and his wife Madam Chen Hsiu Chin were prominent members in the educational field in the 1950s to 1960s, particularly of Chinese institutions such as the Pay Fong High School, the Yock Eng High School and the Nanyang University. Their collection, donated by their daughter Mrs Lee-Wang Cheng Yeng, has over 2,000 documents, comprising mainly letters and personal documents of Mr and Mrs Wang. The recently donated collection of Wu Lien-Teh, a renowned physician in both Malaya and China, has unique photographs and original works by both Wu and his first wife, Ruth.4

The *jiapu*5 (家谱) is a clan’s history or lineage, recording important aspects such as the origin of the family name, the locality of the ancestry, the clan’s migration history, birth and marriage records, honours and achievements. The *jiapu* is the window to the family tree and its branches in Chinese families. One can search the *jiapus* available at the National Library or call the respective *huiguan* (会馆) or clan associations to check on their genealogical records.

#### **A Life Worked Out**

Another approach to family history research is through a person’s profession, career or trade. The *Buku Merah* or *Straits Times* directory is a key reference for deriving details of business leaders and was an early *Who’s who* list in Singapore. The earliest extant print of the directory in the library dates back to 1846.6 Besides a list of residents with their full names, professional titles and addresses, the publication also identifies companies by trade and industry and the heads of these entities..

There are several *Who’s who* listings for Malaya and Singapore which range from as early as 1918 to the present-day, giving details of Singapore’s and Malaya’s elite such as birth dates, positions held, accomplishments and places of residence. The later *Who’s who* extends beyond business and community leaders to include civil servants and industry leaders. The 1948 directory of *Who’s who* by Menon gives an alphabetical list of names, with place of origin, education, positions held before the war, social and community work and even recreational interests and hobbies. Photographs in black and white accompany some profiles. The *Who’s who* of Singapore and Malaysia of the 1970s and the 1980s include a list of lecturers in tertiary institutions and private doctors besides civil servants, merchants, managers and royalty.

#### **Life in the Community**

The middle-class was privileged with time and money and often joined clubs, societies, hobby groups and communities. Newsletters and commemoratives from these organisations sometimes carry reports of individual contributions. The 90th anniversary commemorative of the scouts7 in Singapore is an example of a community publication which profiles key contributors. Some social clubs such as the Singapore Cricket Club (1852), the Swiss Club (1871), the Singapore Recreation Club (1883), and the Singapore Island Country Club (1891) date back to the 19th century. Unfortunately, although these early club commemoratives provide useful information on the happenings and people in their organisations, newsletters and magazines from the 19th century are scant. Nevertheless, looking up articles produced by these clubs or referring to their older members may prove useful as in the examples of the Peranakan Association and the Association of British Malaya.

Although our ancestors often came with little but the clothes on their backs, some succeeded, through sheer perseverance and good luck. A number have given their wealth and time back to community and religious institutions. The philanthropist who donated generously to community causes would have had his name engraved on temple steeles or remembered in clan association records. The bibliography on the publications of the Singapore Chinese Clan Associations8 references holdings on clan associations that are in the National Library, the National Archives, the Nanyang Technological University, the National University of Singapore, among other institutions. Churches also published newsletters on the contributions of ordinary people. They include the *Methodist Message*9 , *St Andrews’ Outlook*10 and the *Diocesan Digest*. 11

School records are another rich resource. These include school magazines, commemorative and souvenir publications. Besides class photographs of teachers and students, these publications also highlight the academic, sporting and leadership accomplishments of their students. The National Library has school magazines mainly from the 1960s onwards, an example of which is the *Cedar Magazine*. A school with a long history like the Raff les Institution, has magazines dating back to the 1880s.12 Many established schools also have their own archives or may even have uploaded some school records and photographs online. Schools affiliated with religious groups such as churches, temples and mosques often have descriptive accounts of school events and their participants in their respective religious publications.





