---
title: "In Touch with My Routes: Becoming a Tourist in Singapore"
permalink: /vol-5/issue-4/Jan-2010/Singapore-tourist-touch-routes/
description: "Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow Desmond Wee ponders the Singaporean
  identity while being a tourist in Singapore. "
---
####  Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow _Desmond Wee_ ponders the Singaporean identity while being a tourist in Singapore.

&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;*"To tourists around the world over, the Merlion is the <br> &emsp;&emsp;&emsp;tourism symbol of Singapore. To the architects of <br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;independent Singapore, it is the story of a concept that <br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;worked. To the travel industry, it is a souvenir spinner <br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;and an icon that helps to sell Singapore overseas."* <br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;Pamelia Lee (2004: 99)

It struck me when the Merlion was struck, more by the discourses around it than the stroke of lightning that bore a hole in its skull. Forty-five years after its creation, I wonder about the Merlion as an emblem for the Singapore Tourism Board (STB), how Singaporean Fraser Brunner felt when he conceptualised the animal and if that mattered at all. According to the Report of the Tourism Task Force 1984 (in Schoppert 2005: 25), “what Singapore suffers from is an identity problem as there is no landmark or monument which a tourist can easily associate Singapore with”. In a paper for a course “Questioning Evolution and Progress” at the National University of Singapore, Devan (2006: 4) related the issue, rather than being about “how tourists identify Singaporeans” it was about the Singaporean “struggle for an identity”.

However, the complexities of identity acquisition cannot elude how tourists identify Singaporeans. As described by Lanfant, Allcock & Bruner (1995: ix), it is tourism which “compels local societies to become aware and to question the identities they offer to foreigners as well as the prior images that are imposed upon them.” Representations in this sense are not only constituted by embodied practices, but they also constitute the ways in which identities are performed. By the same token, Singaporeans identify tourists as much as tourists identify Singaporeans, and in asking how Singaporeans identify themselves in the fostering of identity, I also ask if it is possible for Singaporeans to identify themselves as *tourists*. Who is the Singaporean under the Merlion?

Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew once remarked that economic progress must not undermine the “heartware of Singapore” referring to “our love for the country, our rootedness and our sense of community and nationhood” (*The Straits Times*, 20 October 1997). The cultivation of identity, as a need and means of survival, has evolved into a “substantial injection of selfdefinition and national pride” (Chua & Kuo 1990: 6). However, given the birth of active citizenry, contestations across and in between *routes* pertaining to the definition of self come to the fore. Kellner (1992) has suggested the emergence of identity as a “freely chosen game” in a “theatrical presentation of the self”. In this sense, our rootedness is also our “routedness”, a play in which identities are constituted within and not outside representation, and “relate to the invention of tradition as much as to tradition itself…” (Hall 1996: 4). Instead of the “so-called return to roots”, Hall (1996: 4) advocates a “coming-to-termswith our ‘routes’” with which we can relate to cultural identities as fluid and emergent rather than being static. In the same way, Crouch, Aronsson and Wahlström (2001) maintain that the consideration of place and its represented culture “through encounter as ‘routes’ suggests a much less stable and fixed experienced geography”. This framing of text in terms of a becoming of identity repositions the performance of self as “the changing same” (Gilroy 1994) and discusses the myriad ways in which knowledge and performances based on their representations are being (re)produced.

That ubiquitous “where are you from?” question which constantly follows tourists becomes variegated within the space of modernity evidenced through a measure of uncertainty as fluid productions of meanings manifest. With emergent hybridities evidenced in the blurring of traditional dichotomies such as subject-object, production-consumption and touristlocal, it becomes increasingly difficult to ascertain a place called “home” and separate images and experiences that shape tourism from the every day. McCabe (2002: 63) reiterates that “tourism is now so pervasive in postmodern society that, rather than conceiving tourism as a ‘departure’ from the routines and practices of everyday life, tourism has become an established part of everyday life culture and consumption.” The “touristification of everyday life” (Lengkeek 2002) is evident in a “spectacular society bombarded by signs and mediatised spaces \[where\] tourism is increasingly part of everyday worlds” (Edensor 2001). While “everyday sites of activity are redesigned in ‘tourist’ mode’” (Sheller and Urry 2004: 5), I ask how we deal with ‘becoming a tourist’ and who becomes the tourist. By contemplating the tourist, tourist place and tourist practice and their concomitant relationships, what are the kinds of dynamics that (re)produce these spaces and how do these relate to the acquisition of identity?

In an indispensable relationship between tourism and identity in which one informs the other, my research in Singapore induces the questioning of identity in terms of the spatial and embodied practices of tourism and the (re)production of representations and discourses which are performed every day. Identities rather than being rooted by place, are re-emerging with new meanings and attributions. What is home? Who is a tourist? Can I be tourist at home? When does that liminal transition happen and when it does, how do I perform tourism? This paper considers how tourist practice is assimilated in the context of the every day through “local” consumption, its translation into tourist identities and vice versa. In contextualising the city and juxtaposing my three-pronged reflexivities as researcher, tourist and local in Singapore, I explore how Singaporeans perform tourism *en route* home through institutional attempts to “rediscover” and “love” the city and the local reiteration of place and identity.


#### **Representing Tourist**

After a visit to the Singapore Visitors Centre, I was armed with things to do around Sıngapore. From the “topless” Hippo Bus tours which gave me an overview of the city, I ventured into the four ethnic quarters in the name of cultural tourism. I visited Chinatown, Little India, Kampong Glam and the colonial district; I took a bumboat ride along the Singapore River to marvel at the waterfall spouting out of the Merlion’s mouth. Since I was travelling alone and could not take photographs of myself and my experience on the boat, I sought postcards like any tourist would. I also consulted the National Library educational e-resource, *OnAsia*  <a href="http://www.onasia.com/nlb">http://www.onasia.com/nlb</a>) which consisted of “highquality copyrighted images created by some of Asia's finest photojournalists and photographers…” featuring “photographic essays, stock photographs and conceptual images that represent a unique visual description of Asia, offering online access to a comprehensive collection of historical, political, social, and cultural images.” By using two search criteria: “tourism” and “tourist”, I extracted and sought an analysis of visual imagery and descriptions which determined place in a tourist setting.

Upon viewing both images and attached descriptions in plates 1 and 2, I realised that through an other perception, I became *by default*, a tourist the moment I was in the boat. My choice to engage in a tourist activity in a designated tourist area afforded a tourist practice that made anyone who sat in the boat a tourist. In plate 3 and within the same area, Duggleby likewise captured yet another tourist, this time taking a photograph. Without a priori knowledge, one would become a tourist while indulging in tourist practice within a tourist place. But at which point did I become a tourist? How do we determine the confines of what constitutes a tourist place and the reciprocity of practice in place?

Still within sight of the Sıngapore River, Plate 4 demonstrates what one might “mistake” for passers-by or pedestrians, tourists walking on the waterfront. In fact, I was a tourist even before I arrived at the ticketing booth. The sense of place and what constitutes identifiable tourist space remain arbitrary depending on the kinds of performances delineated by embodied practice.

In Plate 5, there is a total reversal in which the Caucasian man carrying a camera in a place of worship frequented by tourists, is suddenly acknowledged as a Buddhist devotee, rather than as a tourist. Perhaps the man was, or at least considered himself to be, a devotee or a local, rather than a tourist. If not, at least the photographer thought so. The issue is an epistemological one, delving into the knowledge produced and reproduced in order to sustain performance, perhaps also incorporating other roles such as tourist Buddhist devotee, expatriate Buddhist devotee or local Buddhist devotee.

Both tourist practice and the emphasis on place invite interpretations which seem to disclose the “increasing difficulty of drawing boundaries between the tourist and people who are not tourists” (Clifford 1997) in which distinguishing a tourist becomes “more difficult in circumstances of more complex tourist practices” (Crouch, Aronsson and Wahlström 2001). The performance of place seems to elicit emerging definitions of tourist and how tourism is performed. In other words, all the photographers of the images reproduced above were also tourists doing tourism as they were indulging in taking photographs of tourists and tourism. It is within this context that creative spaces are developed in terms of social practice, in which the place determines the performance of tourists.

#### **Identifying the Tourist**

One definition of the tourist in cultural tourism is a “temporarily leisured person who voluntarily visits a place away from home for the purpose of experiencing a change” (Smith 1977). Since then there have been definitions in terms of typology (Cohen 1979), performance (Edensor 2001) and even ambiguities (McCabe 2002) whose author advocates an investigation into the forms of touristic experience rather than the concept of the tourist as a stable category within tourism discourses. In an e-mail correspondence with a representative of the STB, in my capacity as a tourism researcher, I asked how the STB would define the tourist, and received this:

The STB looks at more than tourists. We welcome visitors (non-residents) who visit Singapore for all kinds of purposes, be it Leisure, Business, Healthcare or Education.

How would residents fit into this broad, welcoming definition? The current *Beyond Words* concept, which is part of the greater *Uniquely Singapore* campaign, “moves beyond promoting the destination through product attributes and strives to bring out the depth of the Singapore experience” (STB, 18 July 2006), illustrated in the article entitled '*Beyond Words', The Next Phase Of Uniquely Singapore Brand Campaign, Breaks New Ground*.





