---
title: "Multiculturalism: A Study of Plurality and Solidarity in Colonial Singapore"
permalink: /vol-6/issue-4/jan-2011/Singapore-multiculturalism-plurality-solidarity/
description: "Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow Phyllis Ghim-Lian Chew draws from
  the social and linguistic history of colonial Singapore, and proposes a
  plurality-solidarity cline with parameters such as dress, food, the arts,
  religious and literary activities, and rites of passage, as a means to study
  the processes of acculturation and assimilation. "
---
####  Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow _Phyllis Ghim-Lian Chew_ draws from the social and linguistic history of colonial Singapore, and proposes a plurality-solidarity cline with parameters such as dress, food, the arts, religious and literary activities, and rites of passage, as a means to study the processes of acculturation and assimilation.

Some foods have become such a part of everyday life in Singapore that their origins have been largely forgotten, and various races have each claimed these dishes as part of their traditional cuisines. Examples of some of these foods include sugee cake, fruit cake, pineapple *tart*, *agar-agar*, curry puff, meat patty, butter cake and *kaya*; these are believed to have originated from the Eurasian community (Marbeck, 2004). In a similar way, the following dishes and desserts that are part of the mainstream Malay menu, were originally Chinese: *char kuay teow*, *tau suan*, *bubor terigu*, *mee rebus*, *tahu goreng* and *laksa*. *Roti prata* (or *roti cana*i in Malaysia), while an Indian derivative, is a favourite among all ethnic groups.

Yet, instead of celebrating this dynamic multiculturalism in Singapore food, Lai (2006) and Pereira (2003) note a tendency to highlight the divisive potential of race, religion and language. Many social scientists have labelled Singapore a “plural society” (Furnivall, 1956, p. 304) where people of different religions, cultures and languages “live side by side, but separately … meeting only in the market-place … mixing but not combining.” While it may be more newsworthy to focus on plurality and separateness, I will instead postulate a plurality-solidarity cline and draw from the social and linguistic history of colonial Singapore as a means to examine the extent of acculturation and assimilation that lay hidden beneath the seemingly divisive veneer of multiculturalism.

#### **A Three-Generation Model: The Plurality-Solidarity Cline**

Our acculturation-assimilation continuum begins with plurality at one end, and solidarity at the other. While plurality conjures images of dissent and divisiveness, solidarity connotes cooperation and peaceful exchange.

Both acculturation and assimilation are degrees in the process of cultural integration. While acculturation sees cultural groups remaining as distinct entities, assimilation, which is found further along the cline, is a condition where the distinction among the groups becomes indistinguishable. To illustrate, we may place a first generation Chinese *coolie* (labourer) on one end of the cline and the second or third generation equivalent in the middle or far end of the cline. Where a newcomer is concerned, he is likely to speak in only his mother tongue, eat the cheapest of meals, and wear his ethnic (Chinese) clothes. Somewhere along the middle of the cline, we have the second or third generation, probably speaking native Malay, eating meals cooked with local ingredients such as tamarind and lemongrass, and wearing a Malayan outfit instead of traditional Chinese costume.

This simple model assumes that the newcomer and his offspring would adopt the values, behaviours and characteristics of the mainstream culture in a “straight-line” progression. It also presumes that those who live in an environment for a long time tend to adapt to the dominant culture more easily than newcomers. The spoken vocabulary used may also indicate where the person is on the cline. For example, Shellabear (1913) surmised that when a Chinese man calls his father *n-tia* (father, in Chinese dialect) rather than *papa*, he probably belongs to an earlier generation. Similarly in the Malacca Chetty (descendants of Indian men from South India and local women from Malacca) community (Thiyagaraj, 1998), it has been said that what instantly differentiates a newcomer from a member of the earlier generation would be his use of *belacan* (dried shrimp paste mixed with pounded chillies), *belimbing* (a tiny acidic fruit) and *chilli padi* (tiny hot chillies) in his cooking!

The speed of transculturation of a new migrant is affected by personal and socio-political variables. For example, when a penniless migrant arrives in colonial Singapore, he would naturally seek out people who can speak his native language and who can help him to understand the “strange” culture around him. He is likely to stay in an enclave of linguistically similar people and, for survival, may be tempted to join clans or secret societies to alleviate the state of anomie that he is experiencing. Such groups and societies would provide him with an environment where familiar norms and values are practised. In this sense the plurality of the society is accentuated. However, there would come a time, the migrant after having paid off his bond, is likely to move out of his enclave to a new area to seek new opportunities for business or perhaps, marriage. Being able to stand on his own two feet and no longer a bonded employee, the migrant would quickly learn the *linguas franca* — in Singapore’s context, English, Malay and Hokkien.

Marriage plays a crucial role in the transculturation of new migrants. For example, if the *singkeh* (new arrival from China) marries a local-born woman, their children would be speedily acculturated to the local customs and way of life. However, if he were to marry, say, an entertainment artiste who is also a new migrant, the acculturation process might be much slower. In another example, if the migrant were to decide to get a wife from China, the acculturation process may be temporarily impeded as the woman would tend to follow her village culture, not the local culture. In instances of interracial marriage, the result is an interesting hybrid identity. Reid (1993) notes that some of the maritime and commercial people recognised by the Portuguese by labels such as Jawa, Malay, Luzon and Jawi are likely to have been the result of such Chinese hybrids.

It is not just the newcomer who journeys on the cline but also the indigene. In other words, acculturation is more likely to be a two-way process of bicultural blending rather than a zero-sum game where one culture is replaced completely by another. As a case in point, we see the Malays in Singapore adopting some Hokkien terms in their speech. This might be seen as a symbolic act of welcome and hospitality. For example, in spoken Malay, the days of the week were adapted from Hokkien *pai-it*, *pai-zi*, *pai za* (weekdays 1, 2, 3) through the use of *hari satu*, *hari dua*, *hari tiga*. This is seen as a variation of the standard Islamicinfluenced terms: *hari isnin*, *hari selasa* and *hari rabu*. The Malays have also unconsciously absorbed much of Hokkien’s lexis through their usage of words such as *beca* (trishaw), *bihun* (vermicelli), *cat* (paint), *cinca*i (anyhow), *guli* (marbles), *kentang* (potato), *kamcent* (sprout), *tahu* (bean curd) and *tauke* (boss). In reciprocity, the later-generation Chinese Hokkiens have also adopted many Malay words in their vocabulary, such as *agak* (guess), *botak* (bald), *champur* (mix), *gadoh* (fight), *jamban* (toilet), *kachau* (disturb), *longkang* (drain), *roti* (bread) and *tolong* (help).

#### **A Bi-and Multicultural Orientation**

Progression along the cline is not necessarily unidirectional but often bi- or multdirectional. For example, the later-generation Chinese saw that their *guanxi* (beneficial social contact) was not only determined by their cultural affiliation to the Malay culture and their Malay language proficiency, but also their level of assimilation of western values, language and culture. For example, when the Babas founded the first modern school for girls, they wanted the language of instruction to be in both English and romanised Malay (Song, 1923, pp. 305–6). Wong Ah Fook, a migrant-made-good who came to Singapore in 1854 at age of 17, ensured that his children spoke not only Malay but also English and Chinese, by sending them to both English-medium and Chinese-medium schools (Lim, 2002). As a third example, Oei Tiong Ham, a Chinese entrepreneur, successfully petitioned the Dutch authorities for permission to wear western attire in public in 1889 (Rush, 1990, pp. 248–52).

Multidirectionality is also revealed through a survey of literary activities associated with the later generations. English language newspapers such as the *Straits Chinese Magazine* (1897–1907) featured not just Confucian classics but also interestingly, Malay poetry such as the *pantun* and *syair*. A Malay language newspaper entitled the *Malaysian Advocate* (founded in 1910) highlighted Malay poetry in the same way, one would note the irony that Malay literary activities were first initiated not by the Malays themselves but by the Baba Chinese (and the Jawi Peranakans), who loved the native genre. Not to be outdone by the flowering of Malay and English literary activities, another group of local-born Chinese, ostensibly influenced by the rise of nationalism in China, started the Chinese-medium press, the *Lat Pau*. The emergence of this pro-China, proChinese lobby points to the fact that the Chinese populace, even among the later-generation, was far from homogenous in their tastes and inclinations. Thus, a study of diversity in colonial Singapore reveals that it is also intracultural, and should not be stereotyped as only intercultural, as has often been the case.

Last but not least, the multicultural orientation of the Babas can also be seen in their vocabulary at the turn of the 20th century, which according to Shellabear (1913) “was two-thirds Malay, one-fifth Hokkien and the remaining being Dutch, Portuguese, English, Tamil and an assortment of Indonesian languages.”




