---
title: The Case of Tras New Village and the Assasination of Henry Gurney During
  the Malayan Emergency
permalink: /vol-6/issue-4/jan-2011/Henry-Gurney-assasination-malayan-emergency/
description: Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow Tan Teng Phee examines the
  circumstances of the Tras New Village, the consequences borne by the community
  as a result of the assassination and its repercussions.
---
#### Lee Kong Chian Research Fellow _Tan Teng Phee_ examines the circumstances of the Tras New Village, the consequences borne by the community as a result of the assassination and its repercussions.

<center><i>"The bamboo music was lively and rousing<br> How miserable Tras resettlement was<br> Here another meal with dried and salted fish<br> A deeply bitter experience we suffer in silence"<br></i> (Hakka song composed by Tras New Villagers at the Ipoh detention camp)</center>

On 16 June 1948, after the murder of three European rubber estate managers in Sungai Siput, Perak, the British colonial government declared a state of emergency in Malaya. The British considered the murders to be the mark of an outbreak of armed communist insurgency; thus, the mass resettlement programme which was put in place by the British thereafter was designed to isolate and defeat the Communists, and simultaneously win the hearts and minds of the rural people. By the end of the Malayan Emergency on 31 July 1960, half a million rural dwellers had resettled into 480 New Villages, 450 of which are still scattered across the Malay Peninsula today. In 1951, Tras New Village became a focal point of British anti-Communist imperatives and the Malayan Emergency.

Tras was an old tin mining settlement in the state of Pahang during the early 20th century and became a rubber-rich area before WWII. Tras New Village, a rural Chinese community contiguous to Tras, was established by the British in 1951. Located approximately 100 km from Kuala Lumpur, its two nearest neighbouring towns are Raub (13 km) and Bentong (20 km). It currently has a population of approximately 1,000, in both its town and new village areas. There is a 20-km winding road near Tras, leading to Fraser’s Hill, a famous hill resort during the colonial era.

Tras New Village is a distinct case because it is located near the spot where British High Commissioner, Sir Henry Gurney, was assassinated on 6 October 1951. On that fateful morning, a group of Communists ambushed and killed the High Commissioner on the Kuala Kubu Bahru-Fraser’s Hill Road, just seven miles (11 km) away from Tras. This tragic incident had a significant impact on the nature of the unfolding Malayan Emergency, as well as on life and prospects for the Tras villagers.

Until recently, the personal accounts and individual memories of New Villagers have largely remained untold in the public narrative. According to official accounts, a typical New Village usually possessed basic amenities such as a police station, a school, a dispensary, a community hall, piped water and electricity. However, in practice, the implementation of such amenities was often hindered by a lack of resources (money, staff, and materials) and the rapid demands for the establishment of new villages made by the government during the Emergency. In addition, the villagers were confined and protected by a barbed wire fence that surrounded their villages and placed under strict control and surveillance. Surveillance methods included curfews, body searches at checkpoints, food restrictions as well as tenant and Identity Certificate registration.

This study adopts a “history from below” perspective to document the social experience of resettlement and life behind the barbed wire fences for the residents in the New Villages. It re-examines and analyses how the assassination of the British High Commissioner to Malaya in 1951 both implicated and changed the lives of Tras New Villagers during the Emergency period. By examining the experiences of Tras New Villagers through oral accounts and interviews, this micro-level study brings attention to the significant impact of the Emergency, including the displacement and forced relocation of this particular rural Chinese community.

#### **The Assassination of Henry Gurney**

On 6 October 1951 at 11 am, Sir Henry Gurney and Lady Gurney, together with their Private Secretary, D. J. Staples, left the King’s House, Kuala Lumpur, for Fraser’s Hill. They were accompanied by an armed convoy consisting of three military vehicles with 13 police personnel. Around 1:15 pm, heavy firing broke out suddenly as they were negotiating an “S” bend between the 56th and 57th mile. The Communists had ambushed the party about two miles from the Gap Road and about eight and a half miles from Fraser’s Hill.

All the police constables in the Land Rover were injured by the first burst of gunfire, but they managed to return fire. Meanwhile, a second wave of Communist gunfire was directed at Gurney’s Rolls Royce and shattered its windscreen, hitting Gurney’s Malay driver, Mohamed Din. He managed to stop the vehicle, but the stationary car then drew more concentrated gunfire. At this moment, Gurney opened the door and got out of the car, drawing fire away from it. Gurney was killed instantly as he attempted to cross the road.1 Two days later, an official funeral was held in Kuala Lumpur for Sir Henry Gurney, who was then buried in the cemetery on Cheras Road in Selangor.2

The people of Malaya were profoundly shocked by news of the tragic death. At a press conference, the Commissioner of Police, W.N. Gray, stated that Sir Henry Gurney’s car had been hit by bullets 35 times.3 Investigations suggested that the Communists had been, in fact, seeking to acquire weapons, and not targeting at the High Commissioner.4 Chin Peng, the secretary-general of the Malayan Communist Party, confirms this in his memoir that the Communist ambush intended “to attack a large armed convoy” and had intended “to seize as many weapons and as much ammunition as the comrades could carry away.”5 It was therefore by accident, rather than by design, that the Communist platoon ambushed and killed Sir Henry Gurney on the Gap Road.

#### **Impact on the Tras Community**

Immediately after the tragedy, the Colonial Government conducted a combination of military, police and air strike operations. There was heavy shelling and bombing of the jungle, day and night for nearly a month. Under strict curfew, the villagers were not permitted to go out to work, only to purchase daily essentials from the local grocery shops in the town area, which opened for business two hours a day. Several elderly informants complained about their loss of income during this period, especially as rubber prices were high at that point in time.

A month after the death of Sir Henry Gurney, the British called off their military operations in the jungle and turned their attention to Tras New Village, which was located seven miles from the assassination scene.6 The British claimed that Tras had become the main source of food supplies for the Communist guerrillas in Western Pahang. The Police also suspected that the Tras villagers had supported Communist activities in the area.7 Based on its past “notoriety”, Tras inhabitants were considered “terrorist sympathizers and helpers” by the British.8 Most importantly, they were suspected of aiding and abetting “the gang which murdered Sir Henry Gurney.”9 In response to their unwillingness to comment, the colonial government initiated an evacuation and the mass detention of Tras inhabitants in November 1951.10

The evacuation scheme unfolded in two phases over two days. The first phase, on 8 November 1951, involved evacuating 1,460 Tras New Villagers, while the second phase on the following day saw the removal of another 700 people. The colonial government successfully removed a total of 2,160 men, women and children from Tras New Village and the town area in a short period of time. They were transferred by lorry and train to the Ipoh Detention Camp in Perak, over 240 km away from their hometown. It was the first mass removal and detention of Chinese New Villagers in a barbed wire fenced resettlement camp since the beginning of the Emergency.

Elderly villagers clearly recall several Assistant Resettlement Officers and local Chinese leaders announcing the British decision on the evacuation. The villagers were given a day to pack their belongings before being transported to the Ipoh detention camp. Many of the elderly informants shared with me that each person was allowed to carry only “one shoulder pole with two baskets” (一人一擔). Then, the Pahang State War Executive Committee sent a working team to each house to assess their livestock, rubber holdings and chattels. Every head of household was then given a government-stamped receipt for any valuable goods left behind. The village was told that they would be credited with a percentage of the total proceeds from the sale of their goods at the Raub town market. However, all my interviewees said that this never came to pass.

At dawn on 7 November 1951 before the evacuation commenced, many villagers prayed to their gods and at their ancestral altars for a safe journey and protection. They burned joss sticks and made offerings with their slaughtered poultry to propitiate their gods and ancestral spirits. The first troops arrived at around 6 am and evacuation orders were broadcast over a mobile loudspeaker.The villagers collected their shoulder poles and assembled in the Tras town area between 6 and 8 am. On their way to Tras, each family had to pass through a gauntlet — a double row of detectives and uniformed police officers guarding an armoured vehicle. Inside the vehicle were Communist informers tasked with screening the villagers as they walked by.

Several female inter-viewees vividly remembered the heartbreaking scenes when family members were separated from one another during the screening operation. An old lady cried out in vain as she was forcefully separated from her young daughter who was taken away by the police. A few elderly ladies wept with the mother while trying to console her.11 Out of 1,460 people screened, a total of 20 villagers (5 women and 15 men) were detained on suspicion of being Communist supporters and food smugglers.12

More than 100 vehicles, including buses, lorries and trucks, were utilised on the first day to transport the Tras villagers. The evacuation team had air cover from Brigand bombers and ground protection from armoured escorts all the way to the Kuala Kubu Bahru railway station. Upon their arrival at the rail siding that afternoon, the Kuala Kubu Bahru branch of the Malayan Chinese Association prepared meals for the villagers at the railway station. They then boarded a special 14-coach train, which transported them to Ipoh. From the Ipoh railway station, the villagers were escorted by armed police and radio vans, and taken in military trucks to the detention camp two miles away.13 It was around 7 pm when they arrived at the Ipoh Detention Camp. Each family was then assigned a small cubicle in a wooden long-house inside the camp as their “new home”.

The remaining 700 residents in Tras made preparations for their evacuation the following day. Several towkays requested for permits to allow their relatives or friends in Raub to help them sell their goods at the Raub market.14 The collective value of the Tras people’s stocks of rubber and food surprised the government officers. The total value of movable property — cars, bicycles, textiles, liquor, rice and other goods from their shops — was an estimated $3,500,000,15 making it one of the richest communities in Pahang. The next morning, on 9 November 1951, the British evacuated the remaining 700 inhabitants from the town area. Tras became a ghost town in late 1951.16

The Ipoh Detention Camp was situated about 5 km from Ipoh.17 All those who I interviewed had distinct memories of the Government’s interrogations at the detention camp. In their investigations of British accusations that the residents of Tras village had “bred, harboured and helped the murderers of Sir Henry Gurney,” the police screened 1,154 adults in the first three months at the Ipoh Detention Camp. Shortly after the interrogations, the first batch of 485 villagers was unconditionally released from the detention camp in late February 1952. The second batch — another 400 people — was released in mid-March, while those remaining were detained for further interrogations.18 Two of the villagers I spoke with said they were detained for between one and two years at the camp without being given any reason for this.19

As a result of the mass interrogations at the Ipoh camp, the British detained a total of 37 Tras inhabitants who were accused of having “helped the murderers of Sir Henry Gurney.”20 The rest of the Tras villagers were gradually released in batches from February 1952 onwards. They were resettled in various New Villages in Pahang but prohibited from returning to Tras. For the first and second batch of released villagers, the British authorities expanded a section of Sempalit New Village, about 15 km from Tras, to accommodate 200 detained families from the Ipoh Detention Camp. Each family was assigned a house in the New Village..

Oral history accounts reveal that some Tras villagers chose to settle at Sungai Raun New Village, about 23 km from Tras. The State Government provided each relocated family with a house lot and four acres of land for cultivation. Other families decided to move to Jerkoh New Village, or Bukit Tinggi New Village, to work as farmers. Those who preferred to become rubber tappers resettled at Sanglee New Village, Sungai Chetang New Village and Sungai Penjuring New Village, all located within a 30 km radius of Tras. These New Villages were enclosed within barbed wire fencing and the villagers were subjected to regular body searches, food control measures, curfews, as well as other restrictions. Some Tras families, however, sought direct assistance from their relatives in various towns and cities, such as Kuala Kubu Bahru, Bentong, Ipoh and Kuala Lumpur. Hence, Tras people were scattered widely across different New Villages and towns shortly after their release from the detention camp.






