---
title: "Women’s Perspectives on Malaya: Isabella Bird on the Chersonese"
permalink: /vol-6/issue-4/jan-2011/Isabella-Bird-chersonese-women/
description: "Senior Librarian Bonny Tan takes a closer look at Isabella Bird’s
  book The Golden Chersonese, which captures her travels through Malaya. "
---
#### Senior Librarian _Bonny Tan_ takes a closer look at Isabella Bird’s book _The Golden Chersonese_, which captures her travels through Malaya.

<center>“There is not very much comfort when one leaves the beaten tracks of travel,<br> but any loss is far more than made up for by the intense enjoyment.”<br> (Bird, 1883, p. 216)</center>

#### **Isabella Bird: The Accidental Tourist**

Born in 1831 in England, Isabella Bird was a celebrated travel writer known for her momentous journeys across various continents. She explored the wild unknown with the barest minimum, mostly on her own — uncommonly adventurous for a woman during the conservative Victorian era.

But travel and travel writing were not something she was naturally inclined towards. One of her obituary notices described her as, “The invalid at home, the Samson abroad,”1 succinctly capturing her contradictory nature. Throughout her life, she was afflicted by ailments, with such varied symptoms that her physicians were often left in a quandary as to the diagnosis of her diseases. At 18, she had an operation to remove a lump from her spine. Thereafter, she suffered from insomnia, nausea and pain, and was often bedridden, barely able to amble out of her home. Miraculously, these sufferings were dispelled when she travelled abroad.2 In fact, some concluded that the travels served as a panacea to a constrained life
at home.

Bird made her first journey at the age of 23 to North America to visit her relatives. It was made on doctor’s orders to recuperate from a bad back, though some say that it was prescribed to help her recover from lovesickness. Thereafter, the travel bug that bit her remained with her.

Bird travelled more widely in her middle age after the death of her mother, she traversed the wide expanse of the Americas, Australia and New Zealand and through the wild lands of Asia such as China, Korea, Malaya and the Middle East. In total, she travelled for more than nine years, though there were long periods when she stayed home. Age did not mellow her venturesome spirit and she chose to explore harsher lands and take on more challenging adventures even as she entered her 70s.

Most of Bird’s early books were based on letters she had written to her only sibling, Henrietta. “In writing to my sister my first aim was accuracy, and my next to make her see what I saw ….” (Bird, 1883, p. viii) However, Henrietta was not just a home-bound shrinking violet who merely received her adventurous sister’s letters. In fact, she was considered the more academic of the two,3 having a fluency in classical languages such as Greek and Latin.

It was Henrietta who had suggested titling Bird’s Malayan travels *The Golden Chersonese*, based on her knowledge of Ptolemaic history and its mention in Milton’s poems. There has been speculation that Henrietta had literally co-written much of Isabella’s earlier books.4 Bird herself had acknowledged her sister as “\[her\] intellect, the inspiration of all \[her\] literary work.”5 For *The Chersonese*, Bird acknowledged that “\[Henrietta’s\] able and careful criticism, as well as loving interest, accompanied \[her\] former volumes through the press.” (Bird, 1883, Preface, p. vii). *The Chersonese*, however was Bird’s last book based on her letters to Henrietta. Henrietta died in 1880 soon after Bird returned from Malaya. Bird expressed her sense of loss noting that the book was written “under the heavy shadow of the loss of the beloved and only sister” (ibid., Preface, p. vii) and dedicated *The Chersonese* to her: “To a beloved memory, this volume is earnestly and sorrowfully dedicated.” Henrietta’s death not only affected Bird emotionally, but likely also her writings. While researching for *The Chersonese*, Bird had appealed several times to John Murray, her publisher, to provide materials to pad up her limited knowledge on Malaya — something which Chubbuck believes Henrietta, if alive, would have invariably supplied to her sister.6

*The Chersonese* was Bird’s first book published after her marriage. Dr John Bishop, a learned and quiet man, who was 10 years younger than Bird, proposed to her in 1877. It is believed that Bird spurned him initially as Henrietta had fallen for him.7 It was only after the death of her sister that Bird married the doctor in 1881, purportedly fulfilling her sister’s dying wish. Bird, who was 50 years old then, dramatically wore mourning black for her wedding finery. Although it is believed that Bird was not truly in love with Dr Bishop, she mourned him deeply when he died five years into the marriage.

#### **The Protected Malay States: Terra Incognita**

*The Golden Chersonese* was the half-way mark of Bird’s published travelogues, which totalled nine titles. In twenty-three letters, Bird wrote about the British presence in Malaya, namely in the Straits Settlements — Singapore, Malacca and Penang — and in the three Protected Malay States — Perak, Selangor and Sungei Ujong8 — which had recently come under a British Residential System. Although the letters seem informal and fluid, the publication is in fact tightly structured. For example, the introduction to the book provides an overview of Malaya, its history, politics, people and landscapes. In a similar pattern, her descriptions of her travels through each Settlement or State is prefaced with a brief survey of the province before she gives her observations of and adventures in these places. However, the book is not solely about Malaya. It begins with a description of China and Bird’s journey down south, with a stop over in Saigon, Vietnam before it elaborates on the Protected Malay States. It ends with an appendix, which describes the Residential system, the government’s opposing slavery and the various letters by Hugh Low.

Bird visited the Protected Malay States a few years after they were newly established as Protected States in 1876. Tin mining was the main industry but these States remained a wild and unexplored outpost for the British officials. In her introductory chapter, Bird noted that contemporaneous Malaya was a terra incognita: “there is no point on its mainland at which European steamers call, and the usual conception of it is a vast and malarious equatorial jungle sparsely peopled by a race of semicivilised and treacherous Mohammedans.” (ibid., p. 1) However, Bird’s survey of the land was brief and necessarily limited as it was based on a mere five-week sojourn which she made chaperoned by British officials, travelling with official transport and lodging in the comfort of their homes.

#### **Singapore: A Chinese City**

Bird’s travels through the Malay Peninsula began in Singapore,9 a pit-stop made on her return journey from Japan in 1879. Her fame had preceded her and she was quickly invited by Cecil Clementi Smith, then Colonial Secretary, to visit the newly formed Protected Malay States. Smith probably saw an opportunity to publicise the value of the Malay States through the writings of a well-known author while Bird took this as another chance at adventure. All she needed were additional cash and necessary letters of introduction before she quickly agreed to “escape from civilization” (ibid., p. 109).

While she considered Singapore too well-known to elaborate on, Bird still gives a vivid vision of the harried, varied people in the growing port city:

&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;How I wish I could convey an idea, however faint, of this<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;huge, mingled, coloured, busy, Oriental population; of the<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;old Kling and Chinese bazaars; of the itinerant sellers of<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; seaweed jelly, water, vegetables, soup, fruit and cooked<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;fish, whose unintelligible street cries are heard above the<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;din of the crowds of coolies, boatmen, and gharriemen<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;waiting for hire; of the far-stretching suburbs of Malay<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;and Chinese cottages; of the sheet of water, by no means<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;clean, round which hundreds of Bengalis are to be seen at<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;all hours of daylight unmercifully beating on great stones<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;the delicate laces, gauzy silks, and elaborate flouncings<br> &emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;of the European ladies; of the ceaseless rush and hum of<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;industry, and of the resistless, overpowering astonishing<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;Chinese element, which is gradually turning Singapore<br>&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;into a Chinese city! (Bird, 1883, pp. 119—120)

Details accompany Bird’s descriptions, but they are neither dogmatic nor boring, always informing and giving flesh to a general impression. Her first biographer, Anna Stoddart, recognised Bird’s “capacity for accurate observation, her retentive memory, and her power of vivid portrayal, \[that\] have enabled multitudes to share her experiences and ad ventures in those lands beyond the pale which drew her ever with magnetic force.” (Stoddart, 1908, p. v) Take for example her detailed description of the many tribes that made up Singapore’s populace in the late 19th century:

The English, though powerful as the ruling race, are<br> numerically nowhere, and certainly make no impression<br> on the eye. The Chinese … are not only numerous enough,<br> but rich and important enough to give Singapore the air<br> of a Chinese town with a foreign settlement … the native<br> Malays … who, besides being tolerably industrious<br> as boatmen and fishermen, form the main body of the<br> police. The Parsee merchants … form a respectable class<br> of merchants …. The Javanese are numerous, and make<br> good servants and sailors. Some of the small merchants<br> and many of the clerks are Portuguese immigrants from<br> Malacca; and traders from Borneo, Sumatra, Celebes, Bali,<br> and other islands of the Malay Archipelago are scattered<br> among the throng. The washermen and grooms are nearly<br> all Bengalees. Jews and Arabs make money and keep it,<br> and are, as everywhere, shrewd and keen, and only mee<br>t their equals among the Chinese … the Klings from the<br> Coromandel coast … are the most attractive in appearance<br> ….” (Bird, 1883, pp. 114–115)



